# Basics of Structures

Let us create a few structures suitable for graphics. The basic object is a point, which we will assume has an x coordinate and a y coordinate, both integers.

The two components can be placed in a structure declared like this:

```c
struct point {
    int x;
    int y;
};
```

- The keyword `struct` introduces a structure declaration, which is a list of declarations enclosed in braces.
- An *optional* name called a *structure tag* may follow the word `struct` (as with `point` here). The tag names this kind of structure, and can be used subsequently as a shorthand for the part of the declaration in braces.

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.1.2.5 Types][]

A structure type describes <mark>a sequentially allocated set of member objects</mark>, each of which has an optionally specified name and possibly distinct type.

[C89 &sect;3.1.2.5 Types]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.1.2.5

</div>

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.5.2.1 Structure and union specifiers][]

- A structure is a type consisting of a sequence of named members, whose storage is allocated in an *ordered* sequence.
- A union is a type consisting of a sequence of named members, whose storage *overlap*.

[C89 &sect;3.5.2.1 Structure and union specifiers]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.5.2.1

</div>

## Members

The variables named in a structure are called **members**.

- A structure member or tag and an ordinary (i.e., non-member) variable can have the same name without conflict, since they can always be distinguished by context.
- Furthermore, the same member names may occur in different structures, although as a matter of style one would normally use the same names only for closely related objects.

## Declaration

A `struct` declaration defines a type. The right brace that terminates the list of members may be followed by a list of variables, just as for any basic type. That is,

```c
struct { ... } x, y, z; // 會為 x, y, z 保留記憶體空間
```

is syntactically analogous to

```c
int x, y, z;
```

in the sense that each statement declares `x`, `y` and `z` to be variables of the named type and causes space to be set aside for them.

A structure declaration that is not followed by a list of variables reserves no storage; it merely describes a template or shape of a structure.

```c
struct { ... }; // 不會保留記憶體空間
```

---

If the declaration is tagged, however, the tag can be used later in definitions of instances of the structure.

<div class="alert-example">

Given the declaration of `point` above,

```c
struct point pt;
```

defines a variable `pt` which is a structure of type `struct point`.

</div>

## Initialization

A structure can be initialized by following its definition with a list of initializers, each a constant expression, for the members:

```c
struct point pt = { 320, 200 };
```

An automatic structure may also be initialized by assignment or by calling a function that returns a structure of the right type.

## Member Access Operator .

A member of a particular structure is referred to in an expression by a construction of the form

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\begin{algorithmic}
\State structure-name.member
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The structure member operator `.` connects the structure name and the member name.

<div class="alert-example">

To print the coordinates of the point `pt`:

```c
printf("%d,%d", pt.x, pt.y);
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

To compute the distance from the origin (0, 0) to `pt`:

```c
double dist, sqrt(double);

dist = sqrt((double)pt.x * pt.x + (double)pt.y * pt.y);
```

</div>

## Nested Structures

Structures can be nested.

<div class="alert-example">

One representation of a rectangle is a pair of points that denote the diagonally opposite corners:

<div id="representation-of-a-rectangle"></div>

```c
struct rect {
    struct point pt1;
    struct point pt2;
};
```

The `rect` structure contains two `point` structures. If we declare `screen` as

```c
struct rect screen;
```

then

```c
screen.pt1.x
```

refers to the x coordinate of the `pt1` member of `screen`.

<script src="./notes/programming-language/c/c89/ch06/js/6-1.js"></script>

</div>
