# Structures and Functions

The only legal operations on a structure are:

- Copying it or assigning to it as a unit. Copy and assignment include passing arguments to functions and returning values from functions as well.
- Taking its address with `&`.
- Accessing its members.

Structures may not be compared. A structure may be initialized by a list of constant member values; an automatic structure may also be initialized by an assignment.

---

Let us investigate structures by writing some functions to manipulate points and rectangles. There are at least three possible approaches:

- Pass components separately.
- Pass an entire structure.
- Pass a pointer to it.

Each has its good points and bad points.

<div class="alert-example">

The first function, `makepoint`, will take two integers and return a `point` structure:

```c
/* makepoint: make a point from x and y components */
struct point makepoint(int x, int y)
{
    struct point temp;

    temp.x = x;
    temp.y = y;

    return temp;
}
```

Notice that there is no conflict between the argument name and the member with the same name; indeed the re-use of the names stresses the relationship.

`makepoint` can now be used to initialize any structure dynamically, or to provide structure arguments to a function:

```c
struct point makepoint(int, int);

struct rect screen;
struct point middle;

screen.pt1 = makepoint(0, 0);
screen.pt2 = makepoint(XMAX, YMAX);
middle = makepoint((screen.pt1.x + screen.pt2.x) / 2,
                   (screen.pt1.y + screen.pt2.y) / 2);
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The next step is a set of functions to do arithmetic on points. For instance,

```c
/* addpoints: add two points */
struct addpoint(struct point p1, struct point p2)
{
    p1.x += p2.x;
    p1.y += p2.y;

    return p1;
}
```

Here both the arguments and the return value are structures.

We incremented the components in `p1` rather than using an explicit temporary variable to emphasize that structure parameters are <mark>passed by value</mark> like any others.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

As another example, the function `ptinrect` tests whether a point is inside a rectangle, where we have adopted the convention that a rectangle includes its left and bottom sides but not its top and right sides:

```c
/* ptinrect: return 1 if p in r, 0 if not */
int ptinrect(struct point p, struct rect r)
{
    return p.x >= r.pt1.x && p.x < r.pt2.x
        && p.y >= r.pt1.y && p.y < r.pt2.y;
}
```

This assumes that the rectangle is presented in a standard form where the `pt1` coordinates are less than the `pt2` coordinates.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The following function returns a rectangle guaranteed to be in canonical form:

```c
#define min(a, b) ((a) < (b) ? (a) : (b))
#define max(a, b) ((a) > (b) ? (a) : (b))

/* canonrect: canonicalize coordinates of rectangle */
struct rect canonrect(struct rect r)
{
    struct rect temp;

    temp.pt1.x = min(r.pt1.x, r.pt2.x);
    temp.pt1.y = min(r.pt1.y, r.pt2.y);
    temp.pt2.x = max(r.pt1.x, r.pt2.x);
    temp.pt2.y = max(r.pt1.y, r.pt2.y);

    return temp;
}
```

</div>

## Structure Pointer

<mark>If a large structure is to be passed to a function, it is generally more efficient to pass a pointer than to copy the whole structure.</mark>

### Declaration

Structure pointers are just like pointers to ordinary variables. The declaration

```c
struct point *pp;
```

says that `pp` is a pointer to a structure of type `struct point`.

### Member Access Operator

***`.` Operator***

If `pp` points to a `point` structure,

- `*pp` is the structure, and
- `(*pp).x` and `(*pp).y` are the members.

To use `pp`, we might write, for example,

```c
struct point origin, *pp;

pp = &origin;
printf("origin is (%d,%d)\n", (*pp).x, (*pp).y);
```

- The parentheses are necessary in `(*pp).x` because the precedence of the structure member operator `.` is higher then `*.`
- The expression `*pp.x` means `*(pp.x)`, which is illegal here because `x` is not a pointer.

***`->` Operator (Member Access Through Pointer)***

Pointers to structures are so frequently used that an alternative notation is provided as a shorthand. If `p` is a pointer to a structure, then

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\begin{algorithmic}
\State p->member-of-structure
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

refers to the particular member. So we could write instead

```c
printf("origin is (%d,%d)\n", pp->x, pp->y);
```

#### Associativity

Both `.` and `->` associate from left to right, so if we have

```c
struct rect r, *rp = &r;
```

then these four expressions are equivalent:

```c
r.pt1.x
rp->pt1.x
(r.pt1).x
(rp->pt1).x
```

## Precedence

The structure operators `.` and `->`, together with `()` for function calls and `[]` for subscripts, are at the top of the precedence hierarchy and thus bind very *tightly*.

<div class="alert-example">

Given the declaration

```c
struct {
    int len;
    char *str;
} *p;
```

then

```c
++p->len
```

increments `len`, not `p`, because the implied parenthesization is `++(p->len)`.

Parentheses can be used to alter binding:

- `(++p)->len` increments `p` before accessing `len`.
- `(p++)->len` increments `p` afterward. (This last set of parentheses is unnecessary.)

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In the same way:

- `*p->str` fetches whatever `str` points to.
- `*p->str++` increments `str` after accessing whatever it points to (just like `*s++`).
- `(*p->str)++` increments whatever `str` points to.
- `*p++->str` increments `p` after accessing whatever `str` points to.

</div>
