# The General Problem of Describing Syntax

A language, whether natural (such as English) or artificial (such as Java), is a set of *string*s of characters from some alphabet. The strings of a language are called *sentences* or *statements*.

## Lexeme and Token

Formal descriptions of the *syntax* of programming languages often do *not include* descriptions of the lowest-level syntactic units. These small units are called **lexemes** (consisting of a word or group of words).

The description of lexemes can be given by a *lexical specification*, which is usually separate from the syntactic description of the language.

The lexemes of a programming language include its

- Numeric literals
- Operators
- Special words
- etc.

One can think of programs as strings of lexemes rather than of characters.

Lexemes are partitioned into groups—for example,

- The names of variables,
- Methods,
- Classes,
- and so forth in a programming language form a group called **identifiers**.

Each *lexeme group* is represented by a name, or **token**. So, a token of a language is a category of its lexemes.

<div class="alert-example">

An identifier is a token that can have lexemes, or instances, such as `sum` and `total`. In some cases, a token has only a single possible lexeme.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

For example, the token for the arithmetic operator symbol `+` has just one possible lexeme. Consider the following Java statement:

```java
index = 2 * count + 17;
```

The lexemes and tokens of this statement are

| Lexemes | Tokens      |
| ------- | ----------- |
| `index` | identifier  |
| `=`     | equal_sign  |
| `2`     | int_literal |
| `*`     | mult_op     |
| `count` | identifier  |
| `+`     | plus_op     |
| `17`    | int_literal |
| `;`     | semicolon   |

</div>

The example language descriptions in this chapter are very simple, and most include lexeme descriptions.

## Formal Definition of Languages

In general, languages can be formally defined in two distinct ways:

- By **recognition**
- By **generation**

Although *neither* provides a definition that is practical by itself for people trying to learn or use a programming language.

### Language Recognizers

The **syntax analysis** part of a *compiler* is a **recognizer** for the language the compiler translates.

- In this role, the recognizer need not test all possible strings of characters from some set to determine whether each is in the language.
- Rather, it need only determine whether *given programs* are in the language.
- In effect then, the syntax analyzer determines whether the given programs are syntactically correct.

The structure of syntax analyzers, also known as parsers, is discussed in Chapter 4.

### Language Generators

A language **generator** is a device that can be used to generate the sentences of a language.

However, people prefer certain forms of generators over recognizers because they can more easily read and understand them. By contrast,

- The syntax-checking portion of a compiler (a language *recognizer*) is not as useful a language description for a programmer because it can be used only in *trial-and-error* mode.

    For example, to determine the correct syntax of a particular statement using a compiler, the programmer can only submit a speculated version and note whether the compiler accepts it.

- On the other hand, it is often possible to <mark>determine whether the syntax of a particular statement is correct by *comparing it* with the structure of the *generator*.</mark>

There is a close connection between formal generation and recognition devices for the same language. We return to the relationship of generators and recognizers in the next section.
