# Statement-Level Concurrency

In this section, we take a brief look at language design for statement-level concurrency. From the language design point of view, the objective of such designs is to provide a mechanism that the programmer can use to inform the compiler of ways it can <mark>map the program onto a multiprocessor architecture.</mark>

In this section, only one collection of linguistic constructs from one language for statement-level concurrency is discussed: High-Performance Fortran.

## High-Performance Fortran

High-Performance Fortran is a collection of extensions to Fortran 90 that are meant to allow programmers to <mark>specify information to the compiler to help it optimize the execution of programs on multiprocessor computers.</mark>

- HPF includes both new specification statements and intrinsic, or built-in, subprograms.

?> This section discusses only some of the *HPF statements*.

The HPF specification statements appear *as special comments* in a Fortran program. Each of them is introduced by the prefix `!HPF$`, where `!` is the character used to begin lines of comments in Fortran 90. This prefix makes them invisible to Fortran 90 compilers but easy for HPF compilers to recognize.

The primary specification statements of HPF are for specifying:

- The number of processors.
- The distribution of data over the memories of those processors.
- The alignment of data with other data in terms of memory placement.

<div class="alert-example">

The `PROCESSORS` specification has the following form:

```fortran
!HPF$ PROCESSORS procs (n)
```

- This statement is used to specify to the compiler the number of processors that can be used by the code generated for this program.
- This information is used in conjunction with other specifications to tell the compiler how data are to be distributed to the memories associated with the processors.

</div>

The `DISTRIBUTE` and `ALIGN` specifications are used to provide information to the compiler on machines that do not share memory—that is, each processor has its own memory.

- The assumption is that an access by a processor to its own memory is faster than an access to the memory of another processor.

<div class="alert-example">

The `DISTRIBUTE` statement specifies what data are to be distributed and the kind of distribution that is to be used. Its form is as follows:

```fortran
!HPF$ DISTRIBUTE (kind) ONTO procs :: identifier_list
```

- In this statement, kind can be either `BLOCK` or `CYCLIC`.
- The identifier list is the names of the array variables that are to be distributed.

A variable that is specified to be `BLOCK` distributed is divided into n equal groups, where each group consists of contiguous collections of array elements evenly distributed over the memories of all the processors.

- For example, if an array with 500 elements named `LIST` is `BLOCK` distributed over 5 processors, the first 100 elements of `LIST` will be stored in the memory of the first processor, the second 100 in the memory of the second processor, and so forth.

A `CYCLIC` distribution specifies that individual elements of the array are cyclically stored in the memories of the processors.

- For example, if `LIST` is `CYCLIC` distributed, again over five processors, the first element of `LIST` will be stored in the memory of the first processor, the second element in the memory of the second processor, and so forth.

</div>

The form of the `ALIGN` statement is

```fortran
ALIGN array1_element WITH array2_element
```

<div class="alert-example">

`ALIGN` is used to relate the distribution of one array with that of another. For example,

```fortran
ALIGN list1(index) WITH list2(index+1)
```

specifies that the `index` element of `list1` is to be stored in the memory of the same processor as the `index+1` element of `list2`, for all values of `index`.

The two array references in an `ALIGN` appear together in some statement of the program. Putting them in the same memory (which means the same processor) ensures that the references to them will be as close as possible.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following example code segment:

```fortran
REAL list_1 (1000), list_2 (1000)
INTEGER list_3 (500), list_4 (501)
!HPF$ PROCESSORS proc (10)
!HPF$ DISTRIBUTE (BLOCK) ONTO procs :: list_1, list_2
!HPF$ ALIGN list_3 (index) WITH list_4 (index+1)
...
list_1 (index) = list_2 (index)
list_3 (index) = list_4 (index+1)
```

In each execution of these assignment statements, the two referenced array elements will be stored in the memory of the same processor.

</div>

The HPF specification statements provide information for the compiler that it may or may not use to optimize the code it produces. What the compiler actually does depends on its level of sophistication and the particular architecture of the target machine.

---

The `FORALL` statement specifies a sequence of assignment statements that may be executed *concurrently*.

<div class="alert-example">

```fortran
FORALL (index = 1:1000)
    list_1(index) = list_2(index)
END FORALL
```

specifies the assignment of the elements of `list_2` to the corresponding elements of `list_1`.

However, the assignments are restricted to the following order:

1. the right side of all 1,000 assignments must be evaluated first, before any assignments take place.
2. This permits concurrent execution of all of the assignment statements.

- In addition to assignment statements, `FORALL` statements can appear in the body of a `FORALL` construct.
- The `FORALL` statement is a good match with vector machines, in which the same instruction is applied to many data values, usually in one or more arrays.
- The HPF `FORALL` statement is included in Fortran 95 and subsequent versions of Fortran.

</div>

We have briefly discussed only a small part of the capabilities of HPF. However, it should be enough to provide the reader with an idea of the kinds of language extensions that are useful for programming computers with possibly large numbers of processors.

C# 4.0 (and the other .NET languages) include two methods that behave somewhat like `FORALL`. They are loop control statements in which the iterations can be unrolled and the bodies executed concurrently. These are `Parallel.For` and `Parallel.ForEach`.
