# Semaphores

A semaphore is a simple mechanism that can be used to <mark>provide synchronization of tasks.</mark> Although semaphores are an early approach to providing synchronization, they are still used, both in contemporary languages and in library-based concurrency support systems.

## Introduction

Edsger Dijkstra devised semaphores in 1965.

- In an effort to provide *competition* synchronization through mutually exclusive access to shared data structures.
- Semaphores can also be used to provide *cooperation* synchronization.

***Guard***

A **guard** is a linguistic device that allows the guarded code to be executed only when a specified condition is true.

- To provide limited access to a data structure, guards can be placed around the code that accesses the structure.
- So, a guard can be used to allow only one task to access a particular shared data structure at a time.

***Semaphore***

A semaphore is an implementation of a guard.

Specifically, a **semaphore** is a data structure that consists of:

- An integer (*counter* to track resource availability).
- A *queue* that stores task descriptors (for tasks waiting to access the guarded resource).

A **task descriptor** is a data structure that stores all of the relevant information about the execution state of a task.

An integral part of a guard mechanism is a procedure for <mark>ensuring that all attempted executions of the guarded code eventually take place.</mark>

- The typical approach is to have requests for access that occur when access cannot be granted or stored in the task descriptor queue, from which they are later allowed to leave and execute the guarded code.

  ?> 存取資源的要求無法立即被授權時，會將請求儲存在 task descriptor queue 中，排隊等待執行受保護的程式碼。

- This is the reason a semaphore must have both a counter and a task descriptor queue.

Semaphores can have two states:

- Wait (“passeren” - Dutch for “to pass”)
- Release (“vrygeren” - Dutch for “to release”).  

## Cooperation Synchronization

Through much of this chapter, we use the example of a shared buffer used by producers and consumers to illustrate the different approaches to providing cooperation and competition synchronization. (See producer-consumer problem in [13-2][])

?> 兩個 task 生產者與消費者，共用同一個 buffer 來分別儲存或讀取資料，必須確定 buffer 不會上下溢出。

[13-2]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch13/13-2?id=fundamental-concepts

***Two Semaphore variables***

For cooperation synchronization, such a buffer must have some way of recording both the number of empty positions and the number of filled positions in the buffer (to prevent buffer underflow and overflow).

- The *counter* component of a semaphore can be used for this purpose.

    - Semaphore variable `emptyspots` can use its counter to maintain the number of empty locations in a shared buffer used by producers and consumers.
    - Semaphore variable `fullspots` can use its counter to maintain the number of filled locations in the buffer.

- The *queues* of these semaphores can store the descriptors of tasks that have been forced to wait for access to the buffer.

    - The queue of `emptyspots` can store producer tasks that are waiting for available positions in the buffer.
    - The queue of `fullspots` can store consumer tasks waiting for values to be placed in the buffer.

***Operations of Buffer***

Our example buffer is designed as an abstract data type in which

- All data enters the buffer through the subprogram `DEPOSIT`.
- All data leaves the buffer through the subprogram `FETCH`.

---

The `DEPOSIT` subprogram needs only to check with the `emptyspots` semaphore to see whether there are any empty positions. (緩衝區有空位才能存放資料)

- If there is at least one, it can proceed with the `DEPOSIT`, which must have the side effect of decrementing the counter of `emptyspots`.
- If the buffer is full, the caller to `DEPOSIT` must be made to wait in the `emptyspots` queue for an empty spot to become available.

When the `DEPOSIT` is complete, the `DEPOSIT` subprogram increments the counter of the `fullspots` semaphore to indicate that there is one more filled location in the buffer.

---

The `FETCH` subprogram has the opposite sequence of `DEPOSIT`. (緩衝區必須不為空才能提取資料)

- It checks the `fullspots` semaphore to see whether the buffer contains at least one item.
- If it does, an item is removed and the `emptyspots` semaphore has its counter incremented by 1.
- If the buffer is empty, the calling task is put in the `fullspots` queue to wait until an item appears.

When `FETCH` is finished, it must increment the counter of `emptyspots`.

***Operations Are Done Through `wait` and `release`***

The operations on semaphore types often are not direct—they are done through `wait` and `release` subprograms.

- Note that `wait` and `release` must be able to access the task-ready queue.

---

The `wait` semaphore subprogram is used to test the counter of a given semaphore variable.

- If the value is greater than zero, the caller can carry out its operation. In this case, the counter value of the semaphore variable is decremented to indicate that there is now one fewer of whatever it counts.
- If the value of the counter is zero, the caller must be placed on the waiting queue of the semaphore variable, and the processor must be given to some other ready task.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Concise Pseudocode of wait}
\begin{algorithmic}

\procedure{wait}{aSemaphore}
    \if{aSemaphore’s counter > 0}
        \state \textnormal{decrement aSemaphore’s counter}
    \else
        \state \textnormal{put the caller in aSemaphore’s queue \\ attempt to transfer control to some ready task \\ (if the task-ready queue is empty, deadlock occurs)}
    \endif
\endprocedure

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

---

The `release` semaphore subprogram is used by a task to allow some other task to have one of whatever the counter of the specified semaphore variable counts.

- If the queue of the specified semaphore variable is empty, which means no task is waiting, `release` increments its counter (to indicate there is one more of whatever is being controlled that is now available).
- If one or more tasks are waiting, `release` moves one of them from the semaphore queue to the ready queue.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Concise Pseudocode of release}
\begin{algorithmic}

\procedure{release}{aSemaphore}
    \if{aSemaphore’s queue is empty (no task is waiting)}
        \state \textnormal{increment aSemaphore’s counter}
    \else
        \state \textnormal{put the calling task in the task-ready queue \\ transfer control to a task from aSemaphore’s queue}
    \endif
\endprocedure

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

### Example

We can now present an example program that implements cooperation synchronization for a shared buffer.

In this case, the shared buffer stores integer values and is a logically circular structure. It is designed for use by possibly multiple producer and consumer tasks.

The following pseudocode shows the definition of the producer and consumer tasks. Two semaphores are used to ensure against buffer underflow or overflow, thus providing cooperation synchronization.

- Assume that the buffer has length `BUFLEN`,
- and the routines that actually manipulate it already exist as `FETCH` and `DEPOSIT`.
- Accesses to the counter of a semaphore are specified by dot notation. For example, if `fullspots` is a semaphore, its counter is referenced by `fullspots.count`.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{semaphore} fullspots, emptyspots;
\state fullspots.count = 0;
\state emptyspots.count = BUFLEN; \\\\

\state \textbf{task} producer;
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{loop}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ -- produce VALUE --
\state $\hspace{4em}$ wait(emptyspots);     $\hspace{3em}$ \comment{wait for a space}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ DEPOSIT(VALUE);
\state $\hspace{4em}$ release(fullspots);   $\hspace{3.2em}$ \comment{increase filled spaces}
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{end loop}
\state \textbf{end} producer; \\\\

\state \textbf{task} consumer;
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{loop}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ wait(fullspots);      $\hspace{4.2em}$ \comment{make sure it is not empty}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ FETCH(VALUE);
\state $\hspace{4em}$ release(emptyspots);  $\hspace{1.8em}$ \comment{increase empty spaces}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ -- consume VALUE --
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{end loop}
\state \textbf{end} consumer;

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

- The semaphore `fullspots` causes the `consumer` task to be queued to wait for a buffer entry if it is currently empty.
- The semaphore `emptyspots` causes the `producer` task to be queued to wait for an empty space in the buffer if it is currently full.

## Competition Synchronization

Our buffer example does not provide competition synchronization.

?> 確保同時間只有一個 task 可以存取該結構（資料）。

Access to the structure can be controlled with an additional semaphore. This semaphore need not count anything but can <mark>simply indicate with its counter whether the buffer is currently being used.</mark>

- The `wait` statement allows the access only if the semaphore’s counter has the value 1, which indicates that the shared buffer is not currently being accessed.
- If the semaphore’s counter has a value of 0, there is a current access taking place, and the task is placed in the queue of the semaphore.
- Notice that the semaphore’s counter must be initialized to 1.
- The queues of semaphores must always be initialized to empty before use of the queue can begin.

A semaphore that requires only a binary-valued counter, like the one used to provide competition synchronization in the following example, is called a **binary semaphore**.

### Example

The example pseudocode that follows illustrates the use of semaphores to provide both competition and cooperation synchronization for a concurrently accessed shared buffer.

?> The `access` semaphore is used to ensure *mutually exclusive access* to the buffer. Remember that there may be more than one producer and more than one consumer.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{semaphore} access, fullspots, emptyspots;
\state access.count = 1;
\state fullspots.count = 0;
\state emptyspots.count = BUFLEN; \\\\

\state \textbf{task} producer;
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{loop}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ -- produce VALUE --
\state $\hspace{4em}$ wait(emptyspots);     $\hspace{3em}$ \comment{wait for a space}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ wait(access);         $\hspace{5.4em}$ \comment{wait for access}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ DEPOSIT(VALUE);
\state $\hspace{4em}$ release(access);      $\hspace{4.5em}$ \comment{relinquish access}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ release(fullspots);   $\hspace{3.4em}$ \comment{increase filled spaces}
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{end loop}
\state \textbf{end} producer;
\state \\
\state \textbf{task} consumer;
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{loop}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ wait(fullspots);      $\hspace{4em}$ \comment{make sure it is not empty}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ wait(access);         $\hspace{5em}$ \comment{wait for access}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ FETCH(VALUE);
\state $\hspace{4em}$ release(access);      $\hspace{4em}$ \comment{relinquish access}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ release(emptyspots);  $\hspace{1.5em}$ \comment{increase empty spaces}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ -- consume VALUE --
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{end loop}
\state  \textbf{end} consumer;

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

---

A brief look at this example may lead one to believe that there is a problem.

- Specifically, suppose that while a task is waiting at the `wait(access)` call in `consumer`, another task takes the last value from the shared buffer.
- Fortunately, this cannot happen, because the `wait(fullspots)` reserves a value in the buffer for the task that calls it by decrementing the `fullspots` counter.

---

There is one crucial aspect of semaphores that thus far has not been discussed. Recall the earlier description of the problem of competition synchronization: Operations on shared data must not overlap.

- If a second operation begins while an earlier operation is still in progress, the shared data can become corrupted.

A semaphore is itself a shared data object, so the operations on semaphores are also susceptible to the same problem.

- It is therefore essential that semaphore operations be uninterruptible.
- Many computers have uninterruptible instructions that were designed specifically for semaphore operations.
- If such instructions are not available, then using semaphores to provide competition synchronization is a serious problem with no simple solution.

## Evaluation

Using semaphores to provide cooperation synchronization creates an *unsafe* programming environment.

- There is no way to check statically for the correctness of their use, which depends on the semantics of the program in which they appear.

---

In the buffer example:

- Leaving out the `wait(emptyspots)` statement of the `producer` task would result in buffer overflow.
- Leaving out the `wait(fullspots)` statement of the `consumer` task would result in buffer underflow.
- Leaving out either of the releases would result in deadlock.

These are cooperation synchronization failures.

---

The reliability problems that semaphores cause in providing cooperation synchronization also arise when using them for competition synchronization.

- Leaving out the `wait(access)` statement in either task can cause insecure access to the buffer.
- Leaving out the `release(access)` statement in either task results in deadlock.

These are competition synchronization failures.

---

Noting the danger in using semaphores, Per Brinch Hansen (1973) wrote, “The semaphore is an elegant synchronization tool for an ideal programmer who never makes mistakes.” Unfortunately, ideal programmers are rare.
