# Message Passing

This section introduces the fundamental concept of message passing in concurrency.

?> Note that this concept of message passing is *unrelated* to the message passing used in object-oriented programming to enact methods.

## Introduction

For handling the problem of what to do when multiple simultaneous requests were made by other tasks to communicate with a given task.

- It was decided that some form of nondeterminism was required to provide fairness in choosing which among those requests would be taken first.
- This fairness can be defined in various ways, but in general, it means that all requesters are provided an equal chance of communicating with a given task (assuming that every requester has the same priority).

Nondeterministic constructs *for statement-level control*, called **guarded commands**, were introduced by Dijkstra (1975). Guarded commands are discussed in [Section 8-5][]. Guarded commands are the basis of the construct designed for controlling message passing.

[Section 8-5]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch13/13-5?id=introduction

## The Concept of Synchronous Message Passing

Message passing can be either

- Synchronous
- Asynchronous

Here, we describe synchronous message passing. The basic concept of synchronous message passing is that tasks are often busy, and when busy, they cannot be interrupted by other units.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose task `A` and task `B` are both in execution, and `A` wishes to send a message to `B`.

- Clearly, if `B` is busy, it is not desirable to allow another task to interrupt it. That would disrupt `B`’s current processing.
- Furthermore, messages usually cause associated processing in the receiver, which might not be sensible if other processing is incomplete.

The alternative is to provide a linguistic mechanism that allows a task to specify to other tasks when it is ready to receive messages.

- This approach is somewhat *like* an executive who instructs his or her *secretary* to hold all incoming calls until another activity, perhaps an important conversation, is completed.
- Later, when the current conversation is complete, the executive tells the secretary that he or she is now willing to talk to one of the callers who has been placed on hold.

</div>

A task can be designed so that it can suspend its execution at some point, either because it is idle or because it needs information from another unit before it can continue.

- This is like a person who is waiting for an important call. In some cases, there is nothing else to do but sit and wait.
- However, if task `A` is waiting for a message at the time task `B` sends that message, the message can be transmitted.

This actual transmission of the message is called a **rendezvous**.

- Note that a rendezvous can occur only if both the sender and receiver want it to happen.
- During a rendezvous, the information of the message can be transmitted in either or both directions.

Both cooperation and competition synchronization of tasks can be conveniently handled with the message-passing model, as described in the following section.
