
?> Java threads is a complex topic—this section only provides an introduction to its simplest but most useful parts.

# Java Threads

The concurrent units in Java are methods named `run`, whose code can be in concurrent execution with other such methods (of other objects) and with the `main` method. The process in which the `run` methods execute is called a **thread**.

- Java’s threads are *lightweight tasks*, which means that they all run in the same address space.
- This is different from Ada tasks, which are heavyweight threads (they run in their own address spaces).

One important result of this difference is that threads require far less overhead than Ada’s tasks.

***Extends `Thread` vs. Implements `Runnable`***

There are two ways to define a class with a `run` method.

- One of these is to define a subclass of the predefined class `Thread` and override its `run` method.
- However, if the new subclass has a necessary natural parent, then defining it as a subclass of `Thread` obviously will not work.
    - In these situations, we define a subclass that inherits from its natural parent and implements the `Runnable` interface.
    - `Runnable` provides the `run` method protocol, so any class that implements `Runnable` must define `run`.
    - An object of the class that implements `Runnable` is passed to the `Thread` constructor. So, this approach still requires a `Thread` object, as will be seen in the example in [Section 13-7.5][].

[Section 13-7.5]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch13/13-7?id=cooperation-synchronization

***Task Communication: Ada vs. Java***

- In Ada, tasks can be either actors or servers and tasks communicate with each other through `accept` clauses.
- Java `run` methods are all actors and there is no mechanism for them to communicate with each other, except for the `join` method (see [Section 13-7.1][]) and through shared data.

[Section 13-7.1]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch13/13-7?id=the-thread-class

## The Thread Class

The `Thread` class is not the natural parent of any other classes. It provides some services for its subclasses, but it is not related in any natural way to their computational purposes.

- `Thread` is the only class available for creating concurrent Java programs.
- As previously stated, Section 13.7.5 will briefly discuss the use of the `Runnable` interface.

***Methods***

The `Thread` class includes five constructors and a collection of methods and constants.

- The `run` method, which describes the actions of the thread, is always overridden by subclasses of `Thread`.
- The `start` method of `Thread` starts its thread as a concurrent unit by calling its `run` method. The call to `start` is unusual in that control returns immediately to the caller, which then continues its execution, in parallel with the newly started `run` method.

<div class="alert-example">

Following is a skeletal subclass of `Thread` and a code fragment that creates an object of the subclass and starts the `run` method’s execution in the new thread:

```java
class MyThread extends Thread {
    public void run() { ... }
}
...
Thread myTh = new MyThread();
myTh.start();
```

</div>

***Main Thread***

When a Java application program begins execution, a new thread is created (in which the `main` method will run) and `main` is called. Therefore, all Java application programs run in threads.

***Thread Scheduling***

When a program has multiple threads, a scheduler must determine which thread or threads will run at any given time.

- In many cases, there is only a single processor available, so only one thread actually runs at a time.
- It is difficult to give a precise description of how the Java scheduler works, because the different implementations (Solaris, Windows, and so on) do not necessarily schedule threads in exactly the same way.
- Typically, however, the scheduler gives equalsize time slices to each ready thread in round-robin fashion, assuming all of these threads have the same priority. Section 13.7.2 describes how different priorities can be given to different threads.

***Controlling the Execution of Threads***

The `Thread` class provides several methods for controlling the execution of threads.

<div class="alert-example">

The `yield` method (讓 thread 釋放處理器，進入 ready 狀態):

- Which takes no parameters, is a request from the running thread to surrender the processor voluntarily.
- The thread is put immediately in the task-ready queue, making it ready to run.
- The scheduler then chooses the highest-priority thread from the task-ready queue.
- If there are no other ready threads with priority higher than the one that just yielded the processor, it may also be the next thread to get the processor.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The `sleep` method:

- It has a single parameter, which is the integer number of milliseconds that the caller of `sleep` wants the thread to be blocked.
- After the specified number of milliseconds has passed, the thread will be put in the task-ready queue.
- Because there is no way to know how long a thread will be in the task-ready queue before it runs, the parameter to `sleep` is the *minimum* amount of time the thread will not be in execution.
- The `sleep` method can throw an `InterruptedException`, which must be handled in the method that calls `sleep`. Exceptions are described in detail in Chapter 14.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- The `join` method is used to force a method to delay its execution until the `run` method of another thread has completed its execution.
- `join` is used when the processing of a method cannot continue <mark>until the work of the other thread is complete.</mark>

For example, we might have the following `run` method:

```java
public void run() {
    ...
    Thread myTh = new Thread();
    myTh.start();
    // do part of the computation of this thread
    myTh.join(); // Wait for myTh to complete
    // do the rest of the computation of this thread
}
```

The `join` method puts the thread that calls it in the blocked state, which can be ended only by the completion of the thread on which `join` was called.

- If that thread happens to be blocked, there is the possibility of deadlock.
- To prevent this, `join` can be called with a parameter, which is the time limit in milliseconds of how long the calling thread will wait for the called thread to complete.

For example, the following call to `join` will cause the calling thread to wait two seconds for `myTh` to complete. If it has not completed its execution after two seconds have passed, the calling thread is put back in the ready queue, which means that it will continue its execution as soon as it is scheduled.

```java
myTh.join(2000);
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Early versions of Java included three more `Thread` methods: `stop`, `suspend`, and `resume`. All three of these have been *deprecated* because of safety problems.

- The `stop` method is sometimes overridden with a simple method that <mark>destroys the thread by setting its reference variable to `null`.</mark>

</div>

***Termination of Thread***

The normal way a `run` method ends its execution is by reaching the end of its code.

However, in many cases, threads run until told to terminate. Regarding this, there is the question of how a thread can determine whether it should continue or end.

The `interrupt` method is one way to communicate to a thread that it should stop.

- This method does not stop the thread; rather, it sends the thread a message that actually just sets a bit in the thread object, which can be checked by the thread.
- The bit is checked with the predicate method, `isInterrupted`.

This is not a complete solution, because the thread one is attempting to interrupt may be sleeping or waiting at the time the `interrupt` method is called, which means that it will not be checking to see if it has been interrupted.

- For these situations, the `interrupt` method also throws an exception, `InterruptedException`, which also causes the thread to awaken (from sleeping or waiting).
- So, a thread can periodically check to see whether it has been interrupted and if so, whether it can terminate.
- The thread cannot miss the interrupt, because if it was asleep or waiting when the interrupt occurred, it will be awakened by the interrupt.

## Priorities

The priorities of threads need not all be the same.

A thread’s default priority initially is the same as the thread that created it.

- If `main` creates a thread, its default priority is the constant `NORM_PRIORITY`, which is usually 5.
- `Thread` defines two other priority constants, `MAX_PRIORITY` and `MIN_PRIORITY`, whose values are usually 10 and 1, respectively.
- The priority of a thread can be changed with the method `setPriority`. The new priority can be any of the predefined constants or any other number between `MIN_PRIORITY` and `MAX_PRIORITY`.
- The `getPriority` method returns the current priority of a thread. The priority constants are defined in `Thread`.

When there are threads with different priorities, the scheduler’s behavior is controlled by those priorities.

- When the executing thread is blocked or killed or the time slice for it expires, the scheduler chooses the thread from the task-ready queue that has the highest priority.
- A thread with lower priority will run only if one of higher priority is not in the task-ready queue when the opportunity arises.

## Semaphores

The `java.util.concurrent.Semaphore` package defines the `Semaphore` class. Objects of this class implement counting semaphores.

- A counting semaphore has a counter, but no queue for storing thread descriptors.
- The `Semaphore` class defines two methods, `acquire` and `release`, which correspond to the `wait` and `release` operations described in Section 13.3.

The basic constructor for `Semaphore` takes one integer parameter, which initializes the semaphore’s counter.

<div class="alert-example">

The following could be used to initialize the `fullspots` and `emptyspots` semaphores for the buffer example of Section 13.3.2:

```java
fullspots = new Semaphore(0);
emptyspots = new Semaphore(BUFLEN);
```

The deposit operation of the producer method would appear as follows:

```java
emptyspots.acquire();
deposit(value);
fullspots.release();
```

Likewise, the fetch operation of the consumer method would appear as follows:

```java
fullspots.acquire();
fetch(value);
emptyspots.release();
```

The `deposit` and `fetch` methods could use the approach used in Section 13.7.4 to provide the competition synchronization required for the accesses to the buffer.

</div>

## Competition Synchronization

Java methods (but not constructors) can be specified to be `synchronized`. A synchronized method called through a specific object <mark>must complete its execution before any other synchronized method can run on that object.</mark>

Competition synchronization on an object is implemented by specifying that the methods that access shared data are synchronized. The synchronized mechanism is implemented as follows:

- Every Java object has a *lock*.
- Synchronized methods must acquire the lock of the object before they are allowed to execute, which prevents other synchronized methods from executing on the object during that time.
- A synchronized method releases the lock on the object on which it runs when it completes its execution, even if that completion is due to an exception.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following skeletal class definition:

```java
class ManageBuf {
    private int [100] buf;
    ...
    public synchronized void deposit(int item) { ... }
    public synchronized int fetch() { ... }
    ...
}
```

The two methods defined in `ManageBuf` are both defined to be `synchronized`,
which prevents them from interfering with each other while executing
on the same object, when they are called by separate threads.

</div>

An object whose methods are all synchronized is effectively a monitor.

Note that an object may have one or more synchronized methods, as well as one or more unsynchronized methods. <mark>An unsynchronized method can run on an object at anytime, even during the execution of a synchronized method.</mark>

***Synchronized Statement***

In some cases, the number of statements that deal with the shared data sstructure is significantly less than the number of other statements in the method in which it resides. In these cases, it is better to synchronize the code segment that changes the shared data structure rather than the whole method.

This can be done with a so-called *synchronized statement*, whose general form is as follows:

```java
synchronized (expression){
    statements
}
```

- The expression in this code must evaluate to an object.
- The statement can be a single statement or a compound statement.

The object is locked during execution of the statement or compound statement, so the statement or compound statement is executed exactly as if it were the body of a synchronized method.

***Intrinsic Condition Queue***

An object that has synchronized methods defined for it must have a queue associated with it that <mark>stores the synchronized methods that have attempted to execute on it while it was being operated upon by another synchronized method.</mark>

Actually, every object has a queue called the **intrinsic condition queue**. These queues are implicitly supplied. When a synchronized method completes its execution on an object, a method that is waiting in the object’s intrinsic condition queue, if there is such a method, is put in the task-ready queue.

## Cooperation Synchronization

Cooperation synchronization in Java is implemented with the `wait`, `notify`, and `notifyAll` methods, all of which are defined in `Object`, the root class of all Java classes. All classes except `Object` inherit these methods.

- Every object has a wait list of all of the threads that have called `wait` on the object.

- The `notify` method is called to tell one waiting thread that an event that it may have been waiting for has occurred.

    - The specific thread that is awakened by `notify` cannot be determined, because the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) chooses one from the wait list of the thread object at random.
    - Because of this, along with the fact that the waiting threads may be waiting for different conditions, the `notifyAll` method is often used, rather than `notify`.

- The `notifyAll` method awakens all of the threads on the object’s wait list by putting them in the task-ready queue.

- The methods `wait`, `notify`, and `notifyAll` can be called only from within a synchronized method, because they use the lock placed on an object by such a method.

***`wait` Method***

The call to `wait` is always put in a `while` loop that is controlled by the condition for which the method is waiting.

- The `while` loop is necessary because the `notify` or `notifyAll` that awakened the thread may have been called because of a change in a condition other than the one for which the thread was waiting.
- If it was a call to `notifyAll`, there is even a smaller chance that the condition being waited for is now true.
- Because of the use of `notifyAll`, some other thread may have changed the condition to false since it was last tested.

The `wait` method can throw `InterruptedException`, which is a descendant of `Exception`.

- Java’s exception handling is discussed in Chapter 14.
- Therefore, any code that calls `wait` must also catch `InterruptedException`.

<div class="alert-example">

Assuming the condition being waited for is called `theCondition`, the conventional way to use `wait` is as follows:

```java
try {
    while (!theCondition)
        wait();
    // Do whatever is needed after theCondition comes true
}
catch(InterruptedException myProblem) { ... }
```

</div>

### Example: Circular Queue

The following program implements a circular queue for storing `int` values. It illustrates both cooperation and competition synchronization.

<div class="alert-example">

```java
// Queue
// This class implements a circular queue for storing int values. It includes
// - a constructor for allocating and initializing the queue to a specified size.
// - synchronized methods for inserting values into the queue.
// - synchronized methods for removing values from the queue.
class Queue {
    private int [] que;
    private int nextIn,
                nextOut,
                filled,
                queSize;

    public Queue(int size) {
        que = new int [size];
        filled = 0;
        nextIn = 1;
        nextOut = 1;
        queSize = size;
    }

    public synchronized void deposit (int item) throws InterruptedException {
        try {
            while (filled == queSize)
                wait();
            que [nextIn] = item;
            nextIn = (nextIn % queSize) + 1;
            filled++;
            notifyAll();
        }
        catch(InterruptedException e) {}
    }

    public synchronized int fetch() throws InterruptedException {
        int item = 0;
        try {
            while (filled == 0)
                wait();
            item = que [nextOut];
            nextOut = (nextOut % queSize) + 1;
            filled--;
            notifyAll();
        }
        catch(InterruptedException e) {}
        return item;
    }
}
```

Notice that the exception handler (`catch`) does nothing here.

Classes to define producer and consumer objects that could use the `Queue` class can be defined as follows:

```java
class Producer extends Thread {
    private Queue buffer;

    public Producer(Queue que) {
        buffer = que;
    }

    public void run() {
        int new_item;
        while (true) {
            // Create a new_item
            buffer.deposit(new_item);
        }
    }
}

class Consumer extends Thread {
    private Queue buffer;

    public Consumer(Queue que) {
        buffer = que;
    }

    public void run() {
        int stored_item;
        while (true) {
            stored_item = buffer.fetch();
            // Consume the stored_item
        }
    }
}
```

The following code creates a `Queue` object, and a `Producer` and a `Consumer` object, both attached to the `Queue` object, and starts their execution:

```java
Queue buff1 = new Queue(100);
Producer producer1 = new Producer(buff1);
Consumer consumer1 = new Consumer(buff1);
producer1.start();
consumer1.start();
```

We could define one or both of the `Producer` and the `Consumer` as implementations of the `Runnable` interface rather than as subclasses of `Thread`. The only difference is in the first line, which would now appear as follows:

```java
class Producer implements Runnable { ... }
```

To create and run an object of such a class, it is still necessary to create a `Thread` object that is connected to the object. This is illustrated in the following code:

```java
Producer producer1 = new Producer(buff1);
Thread producerThread = new Thread(producer1);
producerThread.start();
```

Note that the buffer object is passed to the `Producer` constructor and the `Producer` object is passed to the `Thread` constructor.

</div>

## Nonblocking Synchronization

Java includes some classes for controlling accesses to certain variables that do not include blocking or waiting.

The `java.util.concurrent.atomic` package defines classes that allow certain nonblocking synchronized access to `int`, `long`, and `boolean` primitive type variables, as well as references and arrays.

<div class="alert-example">

The `AtomicInteger` class defines getter and setter methods, as well as methods for add, increment, and decrement operations.

- These operations are all atomic; that is, they cannot be interrupted, so locks are not required to guarantee the integrity of the values of the affected variables in a multithreaded program.
- This is fine-grained synchronization—<mark>just a single variable.</mark>

Most machines now have atomic instructions for these operations on `int` and `long` types, so they are often easy to implement (implicit locks are not required).

</div>

***Advantage***

The advantage of nonblocking synchronization is efficiency.

- A nonblocking access [that does not occur during contention] will be no slower, and usually faster than one that uses `synchronized`. (無資源競爭也快過於使用 `synchronized`)
- A nonblocking access that occurs during contention definitely will be faster than one that uses `synchronized`, because the latter will require suspension and rescheduling of threads.

## Explicit Locks

Java 5.0 introduced explicit locks as an alternative to `synchronized` method and blocks, which provide implicit locks.

- The `Lock` interface declares the `lock`, `unlock`, and `tryLock` methods.
- The predefined `ReentrantLock` class implements the `Lock` interface.

<div class="alert-example">

To lock a block of code, the following idiom can be used:

```java
Lock lock = new ReentrantLock();
...
Lock.lock();
try {
    // The code that accesses the shared data
} finally {
    Lock.unlock();
}
```

This skeletal code creates a `Lock` object and calls the `lock` method on the `Lock` object.

- Then, it uses a `try` block to enclose the critical code.
- The call to `unlock` is in a `finally` clause to guarantee the lock is released, regardless of what happens in the `try` block.

</div>

---

There are at least two situations in which explicit locks are used rather than implicit locks:

- First, if the application needs to try to acquire a lock but cannot wait forever for it, the `Lock` interface includes a method, `tryLock`, that takes a time limit parameter. If the lock is not acquired within the time limit, execution continues at the statement following the call to `tryLock`.
- Second, explicit locks are used when it is not convenient to have the lock-unlock pairs block structured.
    - Implicit locks are always unlocked at the end of the compound statement in which they are locked.
    - Explicit locks can be unlocked anywhere in the code, regardless of the structure of the program.

---

One danger of using explicit locks (and is not the case with using implicit locks) is that of omitting the unlock.

- Implicit locks are implicitly unlocked at the end of the locked block.
- However, explicit locks stay locked until *explicitly unlocked*, which can potentially be never.

---

As stated previously, each object has an intrinsic condition queue, which stores threads waiting for a condition on the object.

- The `wait`, `notify`, and `notifyAll` methods are the API for an intrinsic condition queue.
- Because each object can have just one condition queue, a queue may have threads in it <mark>waiting for different conditions.</mark>

  <div class="alert-example">

    The queue for our buffer example `Queue` can have threads waiting for either of two conditions (`filled == queSize` or `filled == 0`).

    That is the reason why the buffer uses `notifyAll`. (If it used `notify`, only one thread would be awakened, and it might be one that was waiting for a different condition than the one that actually became true.)

    However, `notifyAll` is expensive to use, because it awakens all threads waiting on an object and all must check their condition to determine which one runs. Furthermore, to check their condition, they must first acquire the lock on the object.

  </div>

An alternative to using the intrinsic condition queue is the `Condition` interface, which uses a condition queue associated with a `Lock` object.

- It also declares alternatives to `wait`, `notify`, and `notifyAll` named `await`, `signal`, and `signalAll`.
- There can be any number of `Condition` objects with one `Lock` object.
- With `Condition`, `signal`, rather than `signalAll`, can be used, which is both easier to understand and more efficient, in part because it results in fewer context switches.

## Evaluation

Java’s support for concurrency is relatively simple but effective. All Java `run` methods are actor tasks and there is no mechanism for communication, except through shared data, as there is among Ada tasks.

Because they are heavyweight threads, Ada’s tasks easily can be distributed to different processors; in particular, different processors with different memories, which could be on different computers in different places. These kinds of systems are not possible with Java’s threads.
