# C# Threads

Although C#’s threads are loosely based on those of Java, there are significant differences. Following is a brief overview of C#’s threads.

## Basic Thread Operations

- Rather than just methods named `run`, as in Java, any C# method can run in its own thread.
- When C# threads are created, they are associated with an instance of a predefined delegate, `ThreadStart`.

When execution of a thread is started, its delegate has the address of the method it is supposed to run. So, execution of a thread is controlled through its associated delegate.

A C# thread is created by creating a `Thread` object. The `Thread` constructor must be sent an instantiation of `ThreadStart`, to which must be sent the name of the method that is to run in the thread.

<div class="alert-example">

We might have

```csharp
public void MyRun1() { ... }
...
Thread myThread = new Thread(new ThreadStart(MyRun1));
```

In this example, we create a thread named `myThread`, whose delegate points to the method `MyRun1`. So, when the thread begins execution it calls the method whose address is in its delegate. In this example, `myThread` is the delegate and `MyRun1` is the method.

</div>

Unlike Java, in which all threads are actors, C# has two categories of threads: actors and servers.

***Actor Thread***

- Actor threads are not called specifically; rather, they are started.
- Also, the methods that they execute do not take parameters or return values.

As with Java, creating a thread does not start its concurrent execution. For actor threads, execution must be requested through a method of the `Thread` class, in this case named `Start`, as in

```csharp
myThread.Start();
```

---

As in Java, a thread can be made to wait for another thread to finish its execution before continuing, using the similarly named method `Join`.

- The `Join` method can take an `int` parameter, which specifies a time limit in milliseconds that the caller will wait for the thread to finish.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose thread `A` has the following call:

```csharp
B.Join();
```

Thread `A` will be blocked until thread `B` exits.

</div>

---

A thread can be suspended for a specified amount of time with `Sleep`, which is a public static method of `Thread`.

- The parameter to `Sleep` is an integer number of milliseconds.
- Unlike its Java relative, C#’s `Sleep` does not raise any exceptions, so it need not be called in a `try` block.

---

A thread can be terminated with the `Abort` method,

- although it does not literally kill the thread.
- Instead, it throws `ThreadAbortException`, which the thread can catch.
- When the thread catches this exception, it usually deallocates any resources it allocated, and then ends (by getting to the end of its code).

***Server Thread***

- A server thread runs only when called through its delegate.
- These threads are called servers because they provide some service when it is requested.
- Server threads are more interesting than actor threads because they usually interact with other threads and often must have their execution synchronized with other threads.

---

Recall from [Section 9-7][], that any C# method can be called indirectly through a delegate.

Such calls can be made by treating the delegate object as if it were the name of the method. This was actually an *abbreviation* for a call to a delegate method named `Invoke`.

[Section 9-7]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch09/9-7

<div class="alert-example">

So, if a delegate object’s name is `chgfun1` and the method it references takes one `int` parameter, we could call that method with either of the following statements:

```csharp
chgfun1(7); // abbreviation
chgfun1.Invoke(7);
```

</div>

***Asynchronous Calls***

C# also supports asynchronous calls to methods that execute in threads.

- Synchronous calls: When the method is called, the caller is *blocked* until the method completes its execution.
- When a thread is called asynchronously, the called thread and the caller thread execute *concurrently*, because the caller is not blocked during the execution of the called thread.

---

A thread is called asynchronously through the delegate instance method `BeginInvoke`.

Parameters sent to `BeginInvoke` include:

- The parameters for the method of the delegate.
- Two additional parameters:
    - One of type `AsyncCallback`.
    - Another of type `object`.

`BeginInvoke` returns an object that implements the `IAsyncResult` interface.

<div class="alert-example">

To call a thread asynchronously, we call it with `BeginInvoke`. For now, we will use `null` for the last two parameters. Suppose we have the following method declaration and thread definition:

```csharp
public float MyMethod1(int x);
    ...
Thread myThread = new Thread(new ThreadStart(MyMethod1));
```

The following statement calls `MyMethod` asynchronously:

```csharp
IAsyncResult result = myThread.BeginInvoke(10, null, null);
```

</div>

---

The delegate class also defines the `EndInvoke` instance method,

- which takes one parameter of type `IAsyncResult`.
- returns the same type that is returned by the method encapsulated in the delegate object.

The return value of the called thread is fetched with `EndInvoke` method,
which takes as its parameter the object (of type `IAsyncResult`) returned by
`BeginInvoke`. `EndInvoke` returns the return value of the called thread.

<div class="alert-example">

To get the float result of the call to `MyMethod`, we would use the following statement:

```csharp
float returnValue = EndInvoke(result);
```

</div>

---

If the caller must continue some work while the called thread executes, it must have a way to determine when the called thread is finished.

- For this, the `IAsyncResult` interface defines the `IsCompleted` property.
- While the called thread is executing, the caller can include code it can execute in a `while` loop that depends on `IsCompleted`.

<div class="alert-example">

We could have the following:

```csharp
IAsyncResult result = myThread.BeginInvoke(10, null, null);
while(!result.IsCompleted) {
    // Do some computation
}
```

</div>

- This is an effective way to accomplish something in the calling thread while waiting for the called thread to complete its work.
- However, if the amount of computation in the `while` loop is relatively small, this is an inefficient way to use that time (because of the time required to test `IsCompleted`).

An alternative is to give the called thread a delegate with the address of a callback method and have it call that method when it is finished. The delegate is sent as the second last parameter to `BeginInvoke`.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following call to `BeginInvoke`:

```csharp
IAsyncResult result = myThread.BeginInvoke(10,
    new AsyncCallback(MyMethodComplete), null);
```

The callback method is defined in the caller. Such methods often simply set a Boolean variable, for example named `isDone`, to `true`. No matter how long the called thread takes, the callback method is called only once.

</div>

## Synchronizing Threads

There are three different ways that C# threads can be synchronized:

- `Interlocked` class.
- `Monitor` class from the `System.Threading` namespace.
- `lock` statement.

Each of these mechanisms is designed for a specific need.

***`Interlocked` Class***

The `Interlocked` class is used when the only operations that need to be synchronized are the incrementing and decrementing of an integer. These operations are done atomically with the two methods of `Interlocked`, `Increment` and `Decrement`, both of which take a reference to an integer as the parameter.

<div class="alert-example">

To increment a *shared* integer named `counter` in a thread, we could use

```csharp
Interlocked.Increment(ref counter);
```

</div>

***`lock` Statement***

The `lock` statement is used to mark a critical section of code in a thread. The syntax of this is as follows:

```csharp
lock(token) {
    // The critical section
}
```

- If the code to be synchronized is in a private instance method, the token is the current object, so `this` is used as the token for `lock`.
- If the code to be synchronized is in a public instance method, a new instance of `object` is created (in the class of the method with the code to be synchronized) and a reference to it is used as the token for `lock`.

***`Monitor` Class***

The `Monitor` class defines five methods, `Enter`, `Wait`, `Pulse`, `PulseAll`, and `Exit`, which can be used to provide more control of the synchronization of threads.

- The `Enter` method, which takes an object reference as its parameter, marks the beginning of synchronization of the thread on that object.
- The `Wait` method suspends execution of the thread and instructs the Common Language Runtime (CLR) of .NET that this thread wants to resume its execution the next time there is an opportunity.
- The `Pulse` method, which also takes an object reference as its parameter, notifies one waiting thread that it now has a chance to run again.
- `PulseAll` is similar to Java’s `notifyAll`. Threads that have been waiting are run in the order in which they called the `Wait` method.
- The `Exit` method ends the critical section of the thread.

The `lock` statement is compiled into a monitor, so `lock` is shorthand for a monitor. A monitor is used when the additional control (for example, with `Wait` and `PulseAll`) is needed.

***Generic Concurrent Data Structures***

.NET 4.0 added a collection of generic concurrent data structures, including structures for queues, stacks, and bags. These new classes are thread safe, meaning that they can be used in a multithreaded program without requiring the programmer to worry about competition synchronization.

The `System.Collections.Concurrent` namespace defines These classes, whose names are

- `ConcurrentQueue<T>`
- `ConcurrentStack<T>`
- `ConcurrentBag<T>`

<div class="alert-example">

So, our producer-consumer queue program could be written in C# using a `ConcurrentQueue<T>` for the data structure and  here would be no need to program the competition synchronization for it.

</div>

Because these concurrent collections are defined in .NET, they are also available in all of the other .NET languages.

## Evaluation

- C#’s threads are a slight improvement over those of its predecessor, Java.
    - For one thing, any method can be run in its own thread.
    - Recall that in Java, only methods named `run` can run in their own threads.
- Java supports actor threads only, but C# supports *both* actor and server threads.
- Thread termination is also cleaner with C# (calling a method (`Abort`) is more elegant than setting the thread’s pointer to `null`).
- Synchronization of thread execution is more sophisticated in C#, because
    - C# has several different mechanisms, each for a specific application.
    - Java’s `Lock` variables are similar to the locks of C#, except that in Java, a lock must be explicitly unlocked with a call to `unlock`. This provides one more way to create erroneous code.
- C# threads, like those of Java, are lightweight, so although they are more efficient, they cannot be as versatile as Ada’s tasks.
- The availability of the concurrent collection classes is another advantage C# has over the other nonfunctional languages discussed in this chapter.
