# Introduction

Languages that support object-oriented programming now are firmly entrenched in the mainstream.

<div class="alert-example">

From COBOL to LISP, including virtually every language in between, dialects that support object-oriented programming
have appeared.

- C++ supports procedural and data-oriented programming, in addition to object-oriented programming.
- CLOS, an object-oriented version of LISP, also supports functional programming.
- Java and C# are newer languages designed to support object-oriented programming. They do not support other programming paradigms but still employ some basic imperative structures and retain the appearance of older imperative languages.
- Ruby is challenging to categorize: It is a pure object-oriented language in the sense that all data are objects, but it is a hybrid language in that one can use it for procedural programming.
- Finally, there is the pure object-oriented but somewhat unconventional language: Smalltalk. Smalltalk was the first language to offer complete support for object-oriented programming.

</div>

The details of support for object-oriented programming vary widely among languages, and that is the primary topic of this chapter.

***Characteristic of OOP***

This chapter relies heavily on Chapter 11. It is in fact a continuation of that chapter.

This relationship reflects the reality that object-oriented programming is, in essence, an application of the principle of abstraction to abstract data types.

- Specifically, in object-oriented programming, the commonality of a collection of similar abstract data types is factored out and put in a new type.
- The members of the collection inherit these common parts from that new type.
- This feature is *inheritance*, which is at the center of object-oriented programming and the languages that support it.

The other characterizing feature of object-oriented programming, *dynamic binding* of method calls to methods, is also extensively discussed in this chapter.

***Supported by Functional Languages***

!> Although object-oriented programming is supported by some of the functional languages, for example, CLOS, OCaml, and F#, those languages are *not discussed* in this chapter.
