# Reflection

A discussion of reflection is not a perfect fit into a chapter on object orientation, but it is even a worse fit into any other chapter of this book. So, this is where we put it.

## Introduction

In general, the later bindings take place in a programming language, the more flexible the language is.

- For example, the late binding of data types in scripting languages and functional languages allows their programs to be more generic than those in the static-typed languages.
- Likewise, the dynamic binding of method calls to methods that is part of the object-oriented languages allows their programs to be easier to maintain and extend.

Among other things, reflection provides the possibility of late binding of calls to methods that are outside the inheritance hierarchy of the calling code.

## What Is Reflection?

A programming language that supports reflection allows its programs to have *run-time* access to their types and structure and to be able to dynamically modify their behavior.

To allow a program to examine its types and structure, that information must be gathered by the compiler or interpreter and made available to the program.

- Just as information about the structure of a database is called metadata, the types and structure of a program are called **metadata**.
- The process of a program examining its metadata is called **introspection**.

A program can modify its behavior dynamically in several different ways:

1. it could change its metadata directly,
2. it could use the metadata,
3. or it could intercede in the execution of the program.

The first of these is complicated; the second is less complex and is common among languages; the third often is called **intercession**.

***Primary Uses***

Some of the primary uses of reflection are in the construction of software tools.

- A class browser needs to enumerate the classes of a program.
- Visual Integrated Development Environments can use type information to assist a developer in building type-correct code.
- Debuggers must be able to examine private fields and methods of classes.
- Test systems need to be able to discover all of the methods of a class to be sure that test data drives all of them.

To illustrate a relatively simple and common use of reflection, we pose the following problem.

<div class="alert-example">

A zoo has a large area devoted to birds.

- The flight cage for each species includes a plaque that provides general information about the inhabitant’s species.
- Included on the plaque is a small screen onto which a visitor with special interest in the species can enter his or her entrance ticket number.
- At the exit to the bird exhibit, the visitor can again enter his or her ticket number on a small screen, which causes a computer to print pictures of the birds for which the visitor previously indicated particular interest.
- The computer system that supports these activities has an object that includes a method that draws a picture of its bird for each of the birds on display.

This seems simple enough.

- When a visitor selects a bird at its flight cage, the system places a reference to an object associated with that bird in a list.
- At the exit of the exhibit, the system calls the draw method of each object in the visitor’s list.

The process is complicated by the fact that the zoo supplies only some of the bird objects.

- Some of them are purchased from third-party vendors and some are donated by zoo benefactors. Because of the multiple sources of the bird objects, they do not have a common base class (other than Object) and do not implement a common interface, so what type references can be saved?

Solutions:

1. One obvious solution is to make each bird object the subclass of a base class. References of the base class type could be stored in the list and dynamic binding could be used to invoke the draw methods.

    The drawback of this approach is that every bird class would need to be modified to make the new classes subclasses of the common base class. It would be better if the new bird classes could simply be added to a code file without modification.

2. Another possible solution would be to use instance of and casting to determine the concrete types of the references. This would add much code to the system, increasing its complexity and cost of maintenance.

3. A better solution is to use the dynamic binding that is possible with reflection.

</div>

## Reflection in Java

Java provides limited support for reflection.

The primary class of the metadata is defined in the namespace, `java.lang.Class`.

- This class has the unfortunately confusing name, `Class`.
- The Java run-time system instantiates an instance of `Class` for each object in the program.
- The `Class` class provides a collection of methods to examine the type information and members of the program objects.
- `Class` is the access point for all of the reflection API.

If the program has a reference to an object (not a primitive), the `Class` object of that object can be obtained by calling its `getClass` method. All classes inherit `getClass` from `Object`, from which all objects descend.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following examples:

```java
float[] totals = new float[100];
Class fltList = totals.getClass();
Class stg = "hello".getClass();
```

- The value of the variable `fltList` will be the `Class` object of the `totals` array object.
- The value of `stg` will be the `Class` object of `String` (because `"hello"` is an instance of `String`).

</div>

If there is no object of a `class`, its Class object can be obtained through the class’ name by attaching `.class` to the name.

<div class="alert-example">

We could have the following:

```java
Class stg = String.class;
```

</div>

If the class has no name, its `Class` object can still be obtained by attaching `.class` to the class definition.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following:

```java
Class intmat = int[][].class;
```

</div>

The `.class` modifier can also be attached to primitive types.

<div class="alert-example">

Although `float.getClass()` is illegal, `float.class` is not.

</div>

There are four methods to get the `Class` of a method.

- The `getMethod` method searches a class to find a specific public method defined in the class or inherited by the class.
- The `getMethods` method returns an array of all of the public methods defined in a class or inherited by the class.
- The `getDeclaredMethod` method searches for a specific method declared in a class, including private methods.
- The `getDeclaredMethods` method returns all of the methods defined in a class.

If the `Class` object of an object is known and a particular method defined by the class of the object is found, that method can be called through the `Method` object of the method with the `invoke` method.

<div class="alert-example">

If the `Method` object named `method` is found with `getMethod`, it can be called with the following:

```java
method.invoke(...);
```

</div>

We can now develop a solution in Java for the problem posed in Section 12.6.2.

<div class="alert-example">

The heart of this application is a class that defines a method that is passed an `Object` reference.

- The method determines the class of the passed reference, finds a `draw` method of that class, and calls that method.
- The solution class is tested with a second class, `ReflectTest`, which creates an array of three `Object` references to classes that represent three different birds.
- Each of these defines a `draw` method that, when called, displays a message indicating that it was called. Then the test calls the class method, passing the elements of the array of references.

The caller method can raise three different exceptions, each of which is
handled in the method.

```java
// A project to illustrate dynamic method calling
// using reflection in Java
package reflect;
import java.lang.reflect.*;
// A class to test the Reflect class
// Creates three objects that represent different birds
// and calls a method that dynamically calls the draw
// methods of the three bird classes
public class ReflectTest {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Object[] birdList = new Object[3];
        birdList[0] = new Bird1();
        birdList[1] = new Bird2();
        birdList[2] = new Bird3();
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[2]);
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[0]);
        Reflect.callDraw(birdList[1]);
    }
}

// A class to define the method that dynamically calls the
// methods of a passed class object
class Reflect {
    public static void callDraw(Object birdObj) {
        Class cls = birdObj.getClass();
        try {
            // Find the draw method of the given class
            Method method = cls.getMethod("draw");
            // Dynamically call the method
            method.invoke(birdObj);
        }
        // In case the given class does not support draw
        catch (NoSuchMethodException e) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException (
                cls.getName() + "does not support draw");
        }
        // In case the callDraw cannot call draw
        catch (IllegalAccessException e) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException (
                "Insufficient access permissions to call" +
                "draw in class " + cls.getName());
        }
        // In case draw throws an exception
        catch (InvocationTargetException e) {
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
        }
    }
}

class Bird1 {
    public void draw() {
        System.out.println("This is draw from Bird1");
    }
}
class Bird2 {
    public void draw() {
        System.out.println("This is draw from Bird2");
    }
}
class Bird3 {
    public void draw() {
        System.out.println("This is draw from Bird3");
    }
}
```

The output of this program is as follows:

```output
This is the draw from Bird3
This is the draw from Bird1
This is the draw from Bird2
```

</div>

## Reflection in C#

- In C#, as in all .NET languages, the compiler places the intermediate code, written in Common Intermediate Language (CIL), in an assembly, which could include several files.
- An assembly also contains an assembly version number and the metadata for all classes defined in the assembly, as well as for all external classes it uses.

Support for reflection in C# is similar to that of Java, with a few important differences.

- Instead of the `java.lang.Class` namespace, `System.Type` is used in .NET.
- Instead of `java.lang.reflect`, `System.Reflection` is used.
- Rather than the `getClass` method, `getType` is used to get the class of an instance.
- Also, the .NET languages use the `typeof` operator in place of the `.class` field used in Java.

<div class="alert-example">

Following is a C# version of the Java project shown above:

```csharp
using System;
using System.Reflection;
namespace TestReflect
{
    // A project to illustrate dynamic method calling
    // using reflection in C#
    // A class to test the Reflect class
    // Creates three objects that represent different birds
    // and calls a method that dynamically calls the draw
    // methods of the three bird classes
    public class ReflectTest {
        public static void Main(String[] args) {
            Object[] birdList = new Object[3];
            birdList[0] = new Bird1();
            birdList[1] = new Bird2();
            birdList[2] = new Bird3();
            Reflect.callDraw(birdList[2]);
            Reflect.callDraw(birdList[0]);
            Reflect.callDraw(birdList[1]);
        }
    }
    // A class to define the method that dynamically calls the
    // methods of a passed class object
    class Reflect {
        public static void callDraw(Object birdObj) {
            Type typ = birdObj.GetType();
            // Find the draw method of the given class
            MethodInfo method = typ.GetMethod("draw");
            // Dynamically call the method
            method.Invoke(birdObj, null);
        }
    }
    class Bird1 {
        public void draw() {
            Console.WriteLine("This is draw from Bird1");
        }
    }
    class Bird2 {
        public void draw() {
            Console.WriteLine("This is draw from Bird2");
        }
    }
    class Bird3 {
        public void draw() {
            Console.WriteLine("This is draw from Bird3");
        }
    }
}
```

</div>

## Comparison Between Java and C# Reflection

Our simple example of dynamic method binding shows just one of the many uses of reflection.

The following program elements can be accessed with reflection in both Java and C#:

- Methods and fields of a class
- Class modifiers (e.g. `public`, `static`, and `final`)
- Constructors
- Method parameter types
- Implemented interfaces
- Inheritance path of a class

In C#, but not Java, the names of the formal parameters of methods can be discovered.

One significant difference between Java’s reflection and that of C# is the `System.Reflection.Emit` namespace, which is part of .NET.

- This namespace provides the ability to create CIL code and an assembly to house that code.
- Java provides no such capability, although it can be done with tools from other suppliers.

Although reflection adds a variety of capabilities to the static-typed languages Java and C#, the user of reflection must be aware of its downsides:

- Performance nearly always suffers with the use of reflection. Resolving types, methods, and fields at run time are not part of the cost of running nonreflective code. Also, when types are dynamically resolved, some optimizations cannot be done on the code.
- Reflection exposes private fields and methods, which violate the rules of abstraction and information hiding, and also may result in unexpected side effects and adversely affect portability.
- Although the advantage of early type checking is widely accepted, the late binding that is possible with reflection obviously negates that advantage.
- Some reflective operations may not work when the code is run under a security manager, also making it non-portable. One such security environment is that of running applets. In most cases, if a problem can be solved without reflection, reflection should not be used.

## Reflection in Dynamic Languages

Reflection is an integral part of most dynamically typed languages.

- In LISP, reflection is routinely used and the dynamic construction and execution of code is not uncommon.
- In other interpreted languages, such as JavaScript, Perl, and Python, the symbol table is kept during interpretation, providing all useful type information.

In Python, for example,

- the `type` method returns the type of a given value. For example, `type([7, 14, 21])` is `list`.
- The `isinstance` method returns a Boolean value if its first parameter has the type named in its second parameter. For example, `isinstance(17, int)` returns True.
- The `callable` function is used to determine whether an expression returns a function object.
- The `dir` function returns the list of attributes, both data and methods, of its parameter object.
