
Initialization has been mentioned in passing many times so far, but always peripherally to some other topic. This section summarizes some of the rules, now that we have discussed the various storage classes.

# Initialization

<div class="alert-note">

<mark>In the absence of explicit initialization:</mark>

- **External** and **static** variables are guaranteed to be initialized to *zero*;
- **Automatic** and **register** variables have *undefined* (i.e., garbage) initial values.

</div>

Scalar variables may be initialized when they are defined, by following the name with an equals sign and an expression:

```c
int x = 1;
char squota = '\'';
long day = 1000L * 60L * 60L * 24L; /* milliseconds/day */
```

<div class="alert-note">

- For **external** and **static variables**, the initializer must be a *constant expression*; the initialization is done *once*, conceptionally *before* the program begins execution.
- For **automatic** and **register variables**, the initializer is not restricted to being a constant: it may be any expression involving previously defined values, even function calls.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The initialization of the binary search program in [3-3][] could be written as

```c
int binsearch(int x, int v[], int n)
{
    int low = 0;
    int high = n - 1;
    int mid;
    ...
}
```

instead of

```c
int low, high, mid;
low = 0;        // assignment statements
high = n - 1;   // assignment statements
```

</div>

<div class="alert-tip">

In effect, initialization of automatic variables are just shorthand for assignment statements.

- Which form to prefer is largely a matter of taste.
- We have generally used explicit assignments, because initializers in declarations are harder to see and further away from the point of use.

[3-3]: /notes/programming-language/c/c89/ch03/3-3

</div>

## Array Initialization

An array may be initialized by following its declaration with a list of initializers enclosed in braces and separated by commas.

<div class="alert-example">

To initialize an array days with the number of `days` in each month:

```c
int days[] = { 31, 28, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31 }
```

</div>

- When the size of the array is omitted, the compiler will compute the length by counting the initializers, of which there are 12 in the above case.
- If there are fewer initializers for an array than the specified size, the others will be zero for external, static and automatic variables.

It is an error to have too many initializers.

```c
int arr[3] = {1, 2, 3, 4}; /* Incorrect */
```

There is no way to specify repetition of an initializer, nor to initialize an element in the middle of an array without supplying all the preceding values as well. (C 語言要求從第一個元素開始，依序初始化。)

### Character Arrays

Character arrays are a special case of initialization; a string may be used instead of the braces and commas notation:

```c
char pattern = "ould";
```

is a shorthand for the longer but equivalent

```c
char pattern[] = { 'o', 'u', 'l', 'd', '\0' };
```

In this case, the array size is five (four characters plus the terminating `'\0'`).
