# Stacks Using Dynamic Arrays

A shortcoming of the stack implementation of the preceding section is the need to know, at compile time, a good bound (`MAX_STACK_SIZE`) on how large the stack will become. We can overcome this shortcoming by using a dynamically allocated array for the elements and then increasing the size of this array as needed.

The following implementation of `CreateS`, `IsEmpty`, and `IsFull` uses a dynamically allocated array stack whose initial capacity (i.e., maximum number of stack elements that may be stored in the array) is 1. Specific applications may dictate other choices for the initial capacity.

```c
typedef struct {
    int key;
    // other fields
} element;

// CreateS
element* stack;
MALLOC(stack, sizeof(*stack));
int capacity = 1;
int top = -1;

// IsEmpty
top < 0

// IsFull
top >= capacity - 1; 
```

- While we must alter the code for the `push` function (Program 3.1) to use the new test for a full stack (replace `MAX_STACK_SIZE` with `capacity`),
- the code for the `pop` function (Program 3.2) is unchanged.

Additionally, the code for `stackFull` is changed.

```c
// Program 3.4
// Stack full with array doubling.
void stackFull() {
    REALLOC(stack, 2 * capacity * sizeof(*stack));
    // sizeof(*stack) == sizeof(element)
    // 前者表示 stack 指標指向的資料的大小
}
```

The new code for `stackFull` attempts to increase the capacity of the array stack so that we can add an additional element to the stack. Before we can increase the capacity of an array, we must decide what the new capacity should be. In array doubling, we double array capacity whenever it becomes necessary to increase the capacity of an array. Program 3.4 gives the code for `stackFull` when array doubling is used.

## Time Complexity of Dynamic Array Doubling in Stack Operations

Although it may appear that a lot of time is spent doubling the capacity of `stack`, this is actually not the case.

- In the worst case, the `realloc` function needs to allocate `2 * capacity * sizeof(*stack)` bytes of memory and copy `capacity * sizeof(*stack)` bytes of memory from the old array into the new one.
- Under the assumptions that memory may be allocated in $O(1)$ time and that a stack element can be copied in $O(1)$ time, the time required by array doubling is $O(\text{capacity})$. Initially, `capacity` is 1.

Suppose that when we are done with all the stack pushes we wish to perform, `capacity` is $2^k$ for some $k,\ k > 0$. (假設最終陣列容量為 $2^k$，那麼總共擴充了 $k$ 次，從 $1 \rightarrow 2 \rightarrow 4 \rightarrow \ldots \rightarrow 2^k$。)

The total time spent over all array doublings is (每次擴充會複製全部資料，因此總複製次數是)

$$
\begin{align}
& O(\sum_{i=1}^{k} 2^i) \\\\
= & O(\dfrac{2 \cdot  (2^k - 1)}{2 - 1}) & \text{等比級數之和：} \dfrac{a \cdot (r^n - 1)}{r - 1} \\\\
= & O(2^{k+1} - 2) = O(2^k)
\end{align}
$$

Since the total number of pushes is more than $2^{k-1}$ (otherwise the array capacity would not have been doubled from $2^{k-1}$ to $2^{k}$), the total time spend in array doubling is $O(n)$, where $n$ is the total number of pushes. (當 push $n > 2^{k - 1}$ 次時，容量會擴充成 $2^{k}$ 容量，此時需要複製 $n$ 項資料，因此第 $n$ 次 push 的成本會是 $O(n)$)

Hence, even with the time spent on array doubling added in, the total run time of `push` over all $n$ pushes is $O(n)$. (大部分 `push` 的成本為 $O(1)$，但個別某次 `push` 可能很耗時，例如觸發了擴充，該次 `push` 為 $O(n)$。而整體平均下來，每次 `push` 仍是 $O(1)$。)

Notice that this conclusion remains valid whenever `stackFull` resizes the stack array by a factor $c > 1$ ($c = 2$ in Program 3.4).
