The purpose of this chapter is to explore the implementation of subprograms.

The discussion will provide the reader with some knowledge of how subprogram linkage works, and also why ALGOL 60 was a challenge to the unsuspecting compiler writers of the early 1960s.

We begin with the

<div class="stepper">

- Simplest situation.
- Nonnestable subprograms with static local variables.
- Advance to more complicated subprograms with stack-dynamic local variables.
- <div>

    Conclude with nested subprograms with stack-dynamic local variables and static scoping.

    The increased difficulty of implementing subprograms in languages with nested subprograms is caused by the need to include mechanisms to access nonlocal variables.

  </div>

</div>

- The static chain method of accessing nonlocals in static-scoped languages is discussed in detail.
- Then, techniques for implementing blocks are described.
- Finally, several methods of implementing nonlocal variable access in a dynamic-scoped language are discussed.

# Subprogram Linkage

The subprogram call and return operations are together called **subprogram linkage**. The implementation of subprograms must be based on the semantics of the subprogram linkage of the language being implemented.

## The General Semantics of Calls

A subprogram call in a typical language has numerous actions associated with it.

- *Parameter-passing method*:

    The call process must include the implementation of whatever parameter-passing method is used.

- *Stack-dynamic allocation of local variables*:

    If local variables are not static, the call process must allocate storage for the locals declared in the called subprogram and bind those variables to that storage.

- *Save the execution status of calling program*:

  The execution status is everything needed to resume execution of the calling program unit. This includes

    - Register values
    - CPU status bits
    - Environment pointer (EP)

  The EP, which is discussed further in [Section 10-3][], is used to access parameters and local variables during the execution of a subprogram.

- *Transfer of control and arrange for the return*:

  The calling process also must
  
    - Arrange to transfer control to the code of the subprogram.
    - Ensure that control can return to the proper place when the subprogram execution is completed.

- *If subprogram nesting is supported, access to nonlocal variables must be arranged*:

    Finally, if the language supports nested subprograms, the call process must create some mechanism to provide access to nonlocal variables that are visible to the called subprogram.

[Section 10-3]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch10/10-3

## The General Semantics of Returns

The required actions of a subprogram return are less complicated than those of a call.

- *In mode and inout mode parameters must have their values returned*:

    If the subprogram has parameters that are out mode or inout mode and are implemented by copy, the first action of the return process is to move the local values of the associated formal parameters to the actual parameters.
- *Deallocation of stack-dynamic locals*:

    It must deallocate the storage used for local variables.

- *Restore the execution status*:

    Restore the execution status of the calling program unit.

- *Return control to the caller*:

    Finally, control must be returned to the calling program unit.
