# Introduction

A *data type* defines a collection of data values and a set of predefined operations on those values.

It is convenient, both logically and concretely, to think of variables in terms of descriptors.

- A **descriptor** is the collection of the attributes of a variable.
- In an implementation, a descriptor is an area of memory that stores the attributes of a variable.
    - If the attributes are all static, descriptors are required only at compile time. These descriptors are built by the compiler, usually as a part of the symbol table, and are used during compilation.
    - For dynamic attributes, however, part or all of the descriptor must be maintained during execution. In this case, the descriptor is used by the run-time system.
    - In all cases, descriptors are used for type checking and building the code for the allocation and deallocation operations.

Care must be taken when using the term *variable*. One who uses only traditional imperative languages may think of identifiers as variables, but that can lead to confusion when considering data types.

- **Identifiers** do not have data types in some programming languages.
- It is wise to remember that identifiers are just one of the *attributes* of a variable.

The word **object** is often associated with the value of a variable and the space it occupies.

- In this book, however, we reserve *object* exclusively for instances of user-defined and language-defined abstract data types, rather than for the values of all program variables of predefined types.
