# Strong Typing

One of the ideas in language design that became prominent in the so-called structured-programming revolution of the 1970s was **strong typing**. Strong typing is widely acknowledged as being a highly valuable language characteristic. Unfortunately, it is often loosely defined, and it is sometimes used in computing literature without being defined at all.

?> A programming language is **strongly typed** if type errors are always detected.

- This requires that the types of all operands can be determined, either at compile time or at run time.
- The importance of strong typing lies in its ability to detect all misuses of variables that result in type errors.
- A strongly typed language also allows the detection, at run time, of uses of the incorrect type values in variables that can store values of more than one type.

<div class="alert-example">

C and C++ are *not* strongly typed languages because both include union types, which are not type checked.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- ML is strongly typed, even though the types of some function parameters may not be known at compile time.
- F# is strongly typed.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Java and C#, although they are based on C++, are nearly strongly typed.

- Types can be explicitly cast, which could result in a type error.
- However, there are no implicit ways type errors can go undetected.

</div>

## The Impact of Coercion on Strong Typing

The issue of coercion is examined in detail in Chapter 7.

The coercion rules of a language have an important effect on the value of type checking.

<div class="alert-example">

Expressions are strongly typed in Java.

However, an arithmetic operator with one floating-point operand and one integer operand is legal. The value of the integer operand is coerced to floating-point, and a floating-point operation takes place.

</div>

However, the coercion also results in a loss of one of the benefits of strong typing—error detection.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose a program had the

- `int` variables `a` and `b`.
- `float` variable `d`.

Now, if a programmer meant to type `a + b`, but mistakenly typed `a + d`, the error would not be detected by the compiler. The value of a would simply be coerced to `float`. So, the value of strong typing is weakened by coercion.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- Languages with a great deal of coercion, like C, and C++, are less reliable than those with no coercion, such as ML and F#.
- Java and C# have half as many assignment type coercions as C++, so their error detection is better than that of C++, but still not nearly as effective as that of ML and F#.

</div>
