# Theory and Data Types

?> This section is restricted to a brief description of some of the mathematical formalisms that underlie data types in programming languages.

## Type Theory

Type theory is a broad area of study in mathematics, logic, computer science, and philosophy.

Even when restricted to computer science, type theory includes such diverse and complex subjects as

- Typed lambda calculus
- Combinators
- The metatheory of bounded quantification
- Existential types
- Higher-order polymorphism.

All these topics are far beyond the scope of this book.

In computer science there are two branches of type theory:

- The practical branch is concerned with data types in commercial programming languages;
- The abstract branch primarily focuses on typed lambda calculus.

## Data Types

A data type defines a set of values and a collection of operations on those values.

### Type Systems

A **type system** is a set of types and the rules that govern their use in programs.

Obviously, every typed programming language defines a type system. The formal model of a type system of a programming language consists of

- A set of types.
- A collection of functions that define the type rules of the language, which are used to determine the type of any expression. Either an attribute grammar or a type map could be used for the functions.

#### Attribute Grammars

A formal system that describes the rules of a type system, attribute grammars, is introduced in Chapter 3.

#### Type Map

An alternative model to attribute grammars uses a type map and a collection of functions, not associated with grammar rules, that specify the type rules.

A type map is similar to the state of a program used in denotational semantics, consisting of a set of ordered pairs, with the

- First element of each pair being a variable’s name.
- Second element being its type.

A type map is constructed using the type declarations in the program.

- In a static typed language, the type map need only be maintained during compilation, although it changes as the program is analyzed by the compiler.

    The concrete version of a type map in a compilation system is the symbol table, constructed primarily by the lexical and syntax analyzers.

- If any type checking is done dynamically, the type map must be maintained during execution.

    Dynamic types sometimes are maintained with tags attached to values or objects.

### Set Operations

As stated previously, a data type is a set of values, although in a data type the elements are often ordered.

- For example, the elements in all enumeration types are ordered.
- However, in a mathematical set the elements are not ordered.
- Despite this difference, set operations can be used on data types to describe new data types.

The structured data types of programming languages are defined by type operators, or constructors that correspond to set operations.

These set operations/type constructors are briefly introduced in the following paragraphs.

#### Finite Mappings

?> Model arrays and functions.

A finite mapping is a function from a finite set of values, the domain set, onto values in the range set.

Finite mappings model two different categories of types in programming languages, functions and arrays, although in some languages functions are not types.

All languages include arrays, which are defined in terms of a mapping function that maps indices to elements in the array.

- For traditional arrays, the mapping is simple—integer values are mapped to the addresses of array elements;
- For associative arrays, the mapping is defined by a function that describes a hashing operation. The hashing function maps the keys of the associate arrays, usually character strings, to the addresses of the array elements.

#### Cartesian Products

?> Model tuples and records.

A Cartesian, or cross product of n sets, $S_1, S_2, \dots, S_n$, is a set denoted $S_1 \times S_2 \times \dots \times S_n$.

Each element of the Cartesian product set has one element from each of the constituent sets. So,

$$
S_1 \times S_2 = \{ \ (x,\ y) \mid x \in S_1 \land y \in S_2 \ \}
$$

<div class="alert-example">

$$
\begin{gather}
\text{If $S_1 = (1,\ 2)$ and $S_2 = (a,\ b)$,} \\\\
S_1 \times S_2 = \{ \ (1,\ a),\ (1,\ b),\ (2,\ a),\ (2,\ b) \ \}
\end{gather}
$$

</div>

- A Cartesian product defines tuples in mathematics, which appear in Python, ML, Swift, and F# as a data type (see 6-5).
- Cartesian products also model records, or structs, although not exactly.

<div class="alert-example">

Cartesian products do not have element names, but records require them.

Consider the following C struct:

```c
struct intFloat {
    int myInt;
    float myFloat;
};
```

This struct defines the Cartesian product type $\text{int} \times \text{float}$ . The names of the elements are `myInt` and `myFloat`.

</div>

#### Set unions

?> Model union types.

The union of two sets, $S_1$ and $S_2$, is defined as $S_1 \cup S_2 = \{ \ x \mid x \in S_1 \lor x \in S_2 \ \}$.

Set union models the union data types, as described in 6-10.

#### Subsets

?> Model subtypes.

Mathematical subsets are defined by providing a rule that elements must
follow. These sets model the subtypes of Ada, although not exactly, because
subtypes must consist of contiguous elements of their parent sets. Elements of
mathematical sets are unordered, so the model is not perfect.

#### Pointers as Exceptions

Notice that pointers, defined with type operators, such as the asterisk (`*`) in C, are not defined in terms of a set operation.
