# Enumeration Types

An **enumeration type** is one in which all of the possible values, which are named constants, are provided, or enumerated, in the definition.

Enumeration types provide a way of defining and grouping collections of named constants, which are called **enumeration constants**.

The enumeration constants are typically implicitly assigned the integer values, 0, 1, … but can be explicitly assigned any integer literal in the type’s definition.

<div class="alert-example">

The definition of a typical enumeration type is shown in the following C# example:

```csharp
enum days {Mon, Tue, Wed, Thu, Fri, Sat, Sun};
```

</div>

## Enumeration Types in Certain Languages

In languages that do *not* have enumeration types, programmers usually simulate them with integer values.

<div class="alert-example">

?> Suppose we needed to represent colors in a C program and C did not have an enumeration type.

We might use 0 to represent blue, 1 to represent red, and so forth. These values could be defined as follows:

```c
int red = 0, blue = 1;
```

Now, in the program, we could use red and blue as if they were of a color type.

The *problem* with this approach is that because we have not defined a type for our colors, there is no type checking when they are used. For example,

- It would be legal to add the two together, although that would rarely be an intended operation.
- They could also be combined with any other numeric type operand using any arithmetic operator, which would also rarely be useful.
- Furthermore, because they are just variables, they could be assigned any integer value, thereby destroying the relationship with the colors. This latter problem could be prevented by making them named constants.

</div>

### Enumeration in C and C++

<div class="alert-example">

C and Pascal were the first widely used languages to include an enumeration
data type. C++ includes C’s enumeration types. In C++, we could have
the following:

```cpp
enum color {red, blue, green, yellow, black};
colors myColor = blue, yourColor = red;
```

The `colors` type uses the default internal values for the enumeration constants, 0, 1, . . . , although the constants could have been specifically assigned any integer literal (or any constant-valued expression) by the programmer.

- The enumeration values are coerced to `int` when they are put in integer context.
- This allows their use in any numeric expression.

For example, if the current value of `myColor` is `blue`, then the expression

```
myColor++
```

would assign the integer code for `green` to `myColor`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

```cpp
enum color {red, blue, green, yellow, black};
```

- C++ also allows enumeration constants to be assigned to variables of any numeric type, though that would likely be an error.

    ```cpp
    int num = red;
    ```

- However, no other type value is coerced to an enumeration type in C++.

    ```cpp
    colors myColor = 4; // error: invalid conversion from 'int' to 'colors'
    ```

    This assignment would be legal if the right side had been cast to `colors` type. This prevents some potential errors.

    ```cpp
    colors myColor = (colors) 4;
    ```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

C++ enumeration constants can appear in only one enumeration type in the same referencing environment.

```cpp
enum color {orange, green}; // note: previous declaration 'color orange'
enum fruit {orange, apple}; // error: 'orange' conflicts with a previous declaration
```

</div>

### Enumeration in Java

All enumeration types in Java are implicitly subclasses of the predefined class `Enum`. Because enumeration types are classes, they can have instance data fields, constructors, and methods.

- Syntactically, Java enumeration type definitions appear like those of C++, except that they can include fields, constructors, and methods.
- The possible values of an enumeration are the only possible instances of the class.
- All enumeration types inherit `toString()`, as well as a few other methods.
- An array of the instances of an enumeration type can be fetched with the static method `values()`.
- The internal numeric value of an enumeration variable can be fetched with the `ordinal()` method.
- No expression of any other type can be assigned to an enumeration variable.
- Also, an enumeration variable is never coerced to any other type.

### Enumeration in C#, ML, F#, Swift

- C# enumeration types are like those of C++, except that they are never coerced to integer. So, operations on enumeration types are restricted to those that make sense. Also, the range of values is restricted to that of the particular enumeration type.

- In ML, enumeration types are defined as new types with `datatype` declarations. For example, we could have the following:

    ```ml
    datatype weekdays = Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday |
    Thursday | Friday
    ```

    The type of the elements of `weekdays` is integer.

- F# has enumeration types that are similar to those of ML, except the reserved word `type` is used instead of `datatype` and the first value is preceded by an OR operator (`|`).

- Swift has an enumeration type in which the enumeration values are names, which represent themselves, rather than having internal integer values. An enumeration type is defined in a structure that is similar to a switch structure, as in:

    ```swift
    enum fruit {
        case orange
        case apple
        case banana
    }
    ```

### Enumeration in Scripting Languages

Interestingly, *none* of the relatively recent scripting languages include enumeration types. These include Perl, JavaScript, PHP, Python, and Ruby. Even Java was a decade old before enumeration types were added.

## Dot notation

Dot notation is used to reference enumeration values, so in our example, the value of `apple` is referenced as `fruit.apple`.
