# Associative Arrays

In the case of non-associative arrays, the indices never need to be stored (because of their regularity).

An **associative array** is an unordered collection of data elements that are indexed by an equal number of values called **keys**.

- The user-defined keys must be stored in the structure.
- So each element of an associative array is in fact a pair of entities, a *key* and a *value*.

We use Perl’s design of associative arrays to illustrate this data structure. Associative arrays are also supported directly by Python, Ruby, and Swift and by the standard class libraries of Java, C++, C#, and F#.

## Structure and Operations

- An associative array is much better than an array if *searches* of the elements are required, because the implicit hashing operation used to access elements is very *efficient*.
- Furthermore, associative arrays are ideal when the data to be stored is paired, as with employee names and their salaries.
- On the other hand, if every element of a list must be processed, it is more efficient to use an array.

<div class="alert-example">

In Perl, associative arrays are called **hashes**, because in the implementation their elements are stored and retrieved with hash functions.

- The namespace for Perl hashes is distinct: Every hash variable name must begin with a percent sign (`%`).
- Each hash element consists of two parts:
    - A key, which is a string.
    - A value, which is a scalar (number, string, or reference).

Hashes can be set to literal values with the assignment statement, as in

```perl
%salaries = ("Gary" => 75000, "Perry" => 57000,
             "Mary" => 55750, "Cedric" => 47850);
```

- Individual element values are referenced using notation that is similar to that used for Perl arrays.

    The key value is placed in braces (`{}`) and the hash name is replaced by a scalar variable name that is the same except for the first character.

- Although hashes are not scalars, the value parts of hash elements are scalars, so references to hash element values use scalar names.

    Recall that scalar variable names begin with dollar signs (`$`). So, an assignment of 58850 to the element of `%salaries` with the key `"Perry"` would appear as follows:

    ```perl
    $salaries{"Perry"} = 58850;
    ```

    A new element is added using the same assignment statement form.

- An element can be removed from the hash with the `delete` operator, as in the following:

    ```perl
    delete $salaries{"Gary"};
    ```

- The entire hash can be emptied by assigning the empty literal to it, as in the following:

    ```perl
    @salaries = ();
    ```

- The size of a Perl hash is dynamic: It grows when an element is added and shrinks when an element is deleted, and also when it is emptied by assignment of the empty literal.

- The `exists` operator returns true or false, depending on whether its operand key is an element in the hash. For example,

    ```perl
    if (exists $salaries{"Shelly"}) ...
    ```

- The `keys` operator, when applied to a hash, returns an array of the keys of the hash.
- The `values` operator does the same for the values of the hash.
- The `each` operator iterates over the element pairs of a hash.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- Python’s associative arrays, which are called **dictionaries**, are similar to those of Perl, except the values are all references to objects.
- The associative arrays supported by Ruby are similar to those of Python, except that the keys can be any object, rather than just strings

There is a progression

- from Perl’s hashes, in which the keys must be strings,
- to PHP’s arrays, in which the keys can be integers or strings,
- to Ruby’s hashes, in which any type object can be a key.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

PHP’s arrays are both normal arrays and associative arrays. They can be treated as either.

- The language provides functions that allow both indexed and hashed access to elements.
- An array can have elements that are created with simple numeric indices and elements that are created with string hash keys.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Swift’s associative arrays are called dictionaries. The keys can be of one specific type, but the values can be of mixed types, in which case they are objects.

</div>
