# Tuple Types

A **tuple** is a data type that is similar to a record, except that the elements are *not named*.

<div class="alert-example">

Python includes an immutable tuple type.

- If a tuple needs to be changed, it can be converted to an array with the `list` function.
- After the change, it can be converted back to a tuple with the `tuple` function.

One use of tuples is when an array must be write protected, such as when it is sent as a parameter to an external function and the user does not want the function to be able to modify the parameter.

Python’s tuples are closely related to its lists, except that tuples are immutable. A tuple is created by assigning a tuple literal, as in the following example:

```python
myTuple = (3, 5.8, 'apple')
```

Notice that the elements of a tuple need not be of the same type.

The elements of a tuple can be referenced with indexing in brackets, as in the following:

```python
myTuple[1]
```

This references the first element of the tuple, because tuple indexing begins at 1.

Tuples can be catenated with the plus (`+`) operator. They can be deleted with the `del` statement. There are also other operators and functions that operate on tuples.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

ML includes a tuple data type.

An ML tuple must have at least two elements, whereas Python’s tuples can be empty or contain one element. As in Python, an ML tuple can include elements of mixed types. The following statement creates a tuple:

```ml
val myTuple = (3, 5.8, 'apple');
```

The syntax of a tuple element access is as follows:

```ml
#1(myTuple);
```

This references the first element of the tuple.

A new tuple type can be defined in ML with a type declaration, such as the following:

```ml
type intReal = int * real;
```

Values of this type consist of an integer and a real. The asterisk (`*`) can be misleading. It is used to *separate* the tuple components, indicating a *type product*, and has nothing to do with arithmetic.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

F# also has tuples.

A tuple is created by assigning a tuple value, which is a list of expressions separated by commas and delimited by parentheses, to a name in a `let` statement.

```fsharp
let tup = (3, 5, 7)
```

If a tuple has two elements, they can be referenced with the functions `fst` and `snd`, respectively.

```fsharp
let pair = (10, 20)
let first = fst pair   // first = 10
let second = snd pair  // second = 20
```

The elements of a tuple with more than two elements are often referenced with a tuple pattern on the left side of a `let` statement.

```fsharp
let tup = (3, 5, 7)
let a, b, c = tup
// a = 3, b = 5, c = 7
```

A tuple pattern is simply a sequence of names, one for each element of the tuple, with or without the delimiting parentheses.

```fsharp
let (var1, var2, ..., varN) = tuple
let var1, var2, ..., varN = tuple
```

When a tuple pattern is the left side of a `let` construct, it is a multiple assignment.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Tuples are used in Python, ML, and F# to allow functions to return multiple values.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Swift, tuples are *passed by value*, so they are sometimes used to pass data to a function when the function is not to change that data.

</div>
