# List Types

Lists were first supported in the first functional programming language, Lisp. They have always been part of the functional languages, but in recent years they have found their way into some imperative languages.

Lists and list operations in Scheme and ML are more fully discussed in Chapter 15.

<div class="alert-example">

Lists in Scheme and Common Lisp are delimited by parentheses (`()`) and the elements are not separated by any punctuation. For example,

```scheme
(A B C D)
```

Nested lists have the same form, so we could have

```scheme
(A (B C) D)
```

In this list, `'(B C)` is a list nested inside the outer list.

<div class="alert-note">

Data and code have the same syntactic form in Lisp and its descendants.

```scheme
'(A B C) ; list data
 (A B C) ; it is a call to the function `A` with parameters `B` and `C`
```

The quote before the parameter list is to prevent the interpreter from considering the list a call to the A function with the parameters B and C, in which case it would interpret it.

</div>

The fundamental list operations in Scheme are two functions that take lists apart.

- The `CAR` function returns the first element of its list parameter. For example, consider the following example:

    ```scheme
    (CAR '(A B C)) ; returns A
    ```

    Common Lisp also has the functions `FIRST` (same as `CAR`), `SECOND`, ... , `TENTH`, which return the element of their list parameters that is specified by their names.

- The `CDR` function returns its parameter list *minus* its first element. For example, consider the following example:

    ```scheme
    (CDR '(A B C)) ; returns (B, C)
    ```

In Scheme and Common Lisp, new lists are constructed with the `CONS` and `LIST` functions.

- The function `CONS` takes two parameters and returns a new list with its first parameter as the first element and its second parameter as the remainder of that list. For example, consider the following:

    ```scheme
    (CONS 'A '(B C)) ; returns the new list (A B C)
    ```

- The `LIST` function takes any number of parameters and returns a new list with the parameters as its elements. For example, consider the following call to `LIST`:

    ```scheme
    (LIST 'A 'B '(C D)) ; returns the new list (A B (C D))
    ```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

ML has lists and list operations, although their appearance is not like those of Scheme. Lists are specified in square brackets (`[]`), with the elements separated by commas (`,`), as in the following list of integers:

```ml
[5, 7, 9]
```

`[]` is the empty list, which could also be specified with `nil`.

The Scheme `CONS` function is implemented as a binary infix operator in ML, represented as `::`. For example,

```ml
3 :: [5, 7, 9] ; returns the new list: [3, 5, 7, 9]
```

The elements of a list must be of the *same type*, so the following list would be illegal:

```ml
[5, 7.3, 9]
```

ML has functions that correspond to Scheme’s `CAR` and `CDR`, named `hd` (head) and `tl` (tail). For example,

```ml
hd [5, 7, 9] ; return 5
tl [5, 7, 9] ; return [7, 9]
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Lists in F# are related to those of ML with a few notable differences.

- Elements of a list in F# are separated by semicolons (`;`), rather than the commas of ML.
- The operations `hd` and `tl` are the same, but they are called as methods of the `List` class, as in `List.hd [1; 3; 5; 7]`, which returns `1`.
- The `CONS` operation of F# is specified as two colons (`::`), as in ML.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Python includes a list data type, which also serves as Python’s arrays.

- Unlike the lists of Scheme, Common Lisp, ML, and F#, the lists of Python are mutable.
- They can contain any data value or object.
- A Python list is created with an assignment of a list value to a name.
- A list value is a sequence of expressions that are separated by commas and delimited with brackets.

For example, consider the following statement:

```python
myList = [3, 5.8, "grape"]
```

The elements of a list are referenced with subscripts in brackets, as in the following example:

```python
x = myList[1] # assigns 5.8 to `x`
```

- The elements of a list are indexed starting at zero.
- List elements also can be updated by assignment.
- A list element can be deleted with `del`, as in the following statement:

```python
del myList[1] # removes the second element of `myList`
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Python includes a powerful mechanism for creating arrays called **list comprehensions**.

- A list comprehension is an idea derived from set notation.
- It first appeared in the functional programming language Haskell (see Chapter 15).
- The mechanics of a list comprehension is that a function is applied to each of the elements of a given array and a new array is constructed from the results.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{The Syntax of a Python List Comprehension}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state [expression for iterate\_var in array if condition]

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

Consider the following example:

```python
[x * x for x in range(12) if x % 3 == 0]
```

- The **range** function creates the array `[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]`.
- The conditional filters out all numbers in the array that are not evenly divisible by 3.
- Then, the expression squares the remaining numbers.
- The results of the squaring are collected in an array, which is returned.

This list comprehension returns the following array:

```python
[0, 9, 36, 81]
```

Slices of lists are also supported in Python.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{The Syntax of a Haskell List Comprehension}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state [body | qualifiers]

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

For example, consider the following definition of a list:

```haskell
[n * n | n <- [1..10]]
```

This defines a list of the squares of the numbers from 1 to 10.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

F# includes list comprehensions, which in that language can also be used to create arrays.

For example, consider the following statement:

```fsharp
let myArray = [|for i in 1 .. 5 -> (i * i) |];;
```

This statement creates the array `[1; 4; 9; 16; 25]` and names it myArray.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Recall from Section 6.5 that C# and Java support generic heap-dynamic collection classes, `List` and `ArrayList`, respectively. These structures are actually lists.

</div>
