# Assignment Operators and Expressions

Most binary operators (operators like `+` that have a left and right operand) have a corresponding **assignment operator** `op=`, where `op` is one of

```c
+ - * / % << >> & ^ |
```

<div class="alert-example">

An expression such as

```c
i = i + 2
```

in which the variable on the left side is repeated immediately on the right, can be written in the compressed form

```c
i += 2
```

The operator `+=` is called an assignment operator.

</div>

If $\text{expr_1}$ and $\text{expr_2}$ are expressions, then

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\begin{algorithmic}
\State expr1 op= expr2
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

is equivalent to

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\begin{algorithmic}
\State expr1 = (expr1) op (expr2)
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

except that $\text{expr_1}$ is computed only once. Notice the parentheses around $\text{expr_2}$.

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.3.16.2 Compound assignment][]

A compound assignment of the form `E1 op = E2` *differs* from the simple assignment expression `E1 = E1 op (E2)` only in that <mark>the lvalue `E1` is evaluated only once.</mark>

[C89 &sect;3.3.16.2 Compound assignment]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.3.16.2

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

```c
x *= y + 1
```

means

```c
x = x * (y + 1)
```

rather than

```c
x = x * y + 1
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The function `bitcount` counts the number of 1-bits in its integer argument.

```c
/* bitcount: count 1 bits in x */
int bitcount(unsigned x)
{
    int b;

    for (b = 0; x != 0; x >>= 1) {
        if (x & 01) b++;
    }

    return b;
}
```

Declaring the argument `x` to be an `unsigned` ensures that when it is right-shifted, vacated bits will be filled with zeros, not sign bits, regardless of the machine the program is run on.

</div>

## Advantage

Quite apart from conciseness, assignment operators have the advantage that they correspond better to the way people think.

We say “add 2 to `i`” or “increment `i` by 2”, not “take `i`, add 2, then put the result back in `i`”. Thus the expression `i += 2` is preferable to `i = i + 2`.

In addition, for a complicated expression like

```c
yyval[yypv[p3 + p4] + yypv[p1]] += 2
```

the assignment operator makes the code easier to understand, since the reader doesn't have to check painstakingly that two long expressions are indeed the same, or to wonder why they're not.

And an assignment operator may even help a compiler to produce *efficient code*.

?> See also: [Why are shortcuts like x += y considered good practice?][]

[Why are shortcuts like x += y considered good practice?]: https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/134118/why-are-shortcuts-like-x-y-considered-good-practice

## Value of Assignment Expression

We have already seen that the assignment statement has a value and can occur in expressions; the most common example is

```c
while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
    ...
```

The other assignment operators (`+=`, `-=`, etc.) can also occur in expressions, although this is less frequent.

In all such expressions,

- the type of an assignment expression is the type of its left operand
- the value is the value after the assignment

<div class="alert-example">

```c
int y;
printf("%d", y = 10); /* print 10 */
```

</div>

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.3.16 Assignment operators][]

An assignment operator stores a value in the object designated by the left operand.

- An assignment expression has the *value* of the left operand after the assignment, but is not an lvalue.
- The *type* of an assignment expression is the type of the left operand unless the left operand has qualified type, in which case it is the unqualified version of the type of the left operand.

[C89 &sect;3.3.16 Assignment operators]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.3.16

</div>

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.2.2.1 Lvalues and function designators][]

- An lvalue is an expression (with an object type or an incomplete type other than void) that designates an object. When an object is said to have a particular type, the type is specified by the lvalue used to designate the object.

---

?> [C89 &sect;A.7 INDEX 24][]

- **lvalue**: comes originally from the assignment expression `E1 = E2` , in which the left operand `E1` must be a (modifiable) lvalue. It is perhaps better considered as representing an object “**locator value**”.
- **rvalue**: is in this Standard described as the “*value of an expression*”.

An obvious example of an lvalue is an identifier of an object.

---

?> K&R &sect;A.5 Objects and Lvalues

- An **Object** is a named region of storage
- An **lvalue** is an expression referring to an object

An obvious example of an lvalue expression is an identifier with suitable type and storage class.

---

```c
int a = 4;
int b = 9;

/*
 * x 是 automatic storage duration 以及 int type，有明確的記憶體位址，屬於 lvalue
 * a + b 是兩個整數的運算結果，沒有對應的記憶體位址，屬於 rvalue
 */
int x = a + b;

// 可以使用關鍵字 auto 來表示 automatic storage duration
// https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/storage_duration
// 不過區域變數本來就預設為此，所以合法但多餘，且會與 C++ 的自動型別推導混淆
auto int x = a + b;
```

[C89 &sect;3.2.2.1 Lvalues and function designators]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.2.2.1
[C89 &sect;A.7 INDEX 24]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#24

</div>
