# Declarations

## Variable Declarations

All variables must be declared before use, although certain declarations can be made implicitly by content. A declaration specifies a type, and contains a list of one or more variables of that type, as in

```c
int lower, upper, step;
char c, line[1000];
```

Variables can be distributed among declarations in any fashion; the lists above could well be written as

```c
int lower;
int upper;
int step;
char c;
char line[1000];
```

The latter form takes more space, but is convenient for adding a comment to each declaration for subsequent modifications.

## Variable Initialization

A variable may also be initialized in its declaration. If the name is followed by an equals sign (`=`) and an expression, the expression serves as an initializer, as in

```c
char esc = '\\';
int i = 0;
int limit = MAXLINE + 1;
float eps = 1.0e-5;
```

- If the variable in question is *not automatic*, <mark>the initialization is done once only, conceptionally before the program starts executing</mark>, and the initializer must be a constant expression.

    External and static variables are initialized to *zero* by default.

- An explicitly initialized *automatic* variable is <mark>initialized each time the function or block it is in is entered</mark>; the initializer may be any expression.

    Automatic variables for which is no explicit initializer have *undefined* (i.e., garbage) values.

<div class="alert-example">

```c
static int x = 42;  // Static storage duration, internal linkage
                    // 只能在此 Translation Unit 中使用。

int y;              // Static storage duration, external linkage
                    // 預設初始化為 0，可以在其他 Translation Unit 中以 `extern` 引用。

int main()
{
    int z;  // Automatic storage duration
            // 沒有初始化，值為 garbage value

    printf("x = %d\n", x); // x = 42
    printf("y = %d\n", y); // y = 0
    printf("z = %d\n", z); // garbage value
    return 0;
}
```

</div>

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.1.2.4 Storage durations of objects][]

An object has a storage duration that determines its lifetime. There are two storage durations:

- **Static storage duration**:

    An object declared with external or internal linkage ([C89 &sect;3.1.2.2 Linkages of identifiers][]), or with the storage-class specifier `static` has static storage duration.

    - For such an object, storage is reserved and its stored value is initialized only *once*, <mark>prior to program startup</mark>.
    - The object exists and retains its last-stored value throughout the execution of the *entire* program.

- **Automatic storage duration**:

    An object declared with no linkage and *without* the storage-class specifier `static` has automatic storage duration storage duration.

    - Storage is guaranteed to be reserved for a new instance of such an object <mark>on each normal entry into the block</mark> in which it is declared, or on a jump from outside the block to a label in the block or in an enclosed block.
    - If an initialization is specified for the value stored in the object, it is performed on each normal entry, but not if the block is entered by a jump to a label.
    - Storage for the object is no longer guaranteed to be reserved when execution of the block ends in any way.

[C89 &sect;3.1.2.4 Storage durations of objects]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.1.2.4
[C89 &sect;3.1.2.2 Linkages of identifiers]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.1.2.2

</div>

## Const Qualifier

The qualifier `const` can be applied to the declaration of any variable to specify that its value will not be changed.

For an array, the `const` qualifier says that the elements will not be altered.

```c
const double e = 2.71828182845905;
const char msg[] = "warning: ";
```

The `const` declaration can also be used with array arguments, <mark>to indicate that the function does not change that array</mark>:

```c
int strlen(const char[]);
```

The result is *implementation-defined* if an attempt is made to change a `const`.

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.5.3 Type qualifiers][]

If an attempt is made to modify an object defined with a const-qualified type through use of an lvalue with non-const-qualified type, the behavior is *undefined*.

```c
const int x = 42;
int* p = (int*)&x;  // 通過類型轉換獲取非 const 指標
*p = 100;           // 試圖修改 const 物件，未定義行為
```

[C89 &sect;3.5.3 Type qualifiers]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.5.3

</div>
