# Arithmetic Operators

The binary arithmetic operators are `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, and the modulus operator `%`.

***Integer Division and Truncation***

Integer division truncates any fractional part.

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.3.5 Multiplicative operators][]

When *integers* are divided and the division is inexact, if <mark>both operands are positive</mark>

- the result of the `/` operator is the largest integer less than the algebraic quotient.
- the result of the `%` operator is positive.

```c
5 / 3 == 1  // Quotient is largest integer less than 5/3
```

[C89 &sect;3.3.5 Multiplicative operators]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.3.5

</div>

## Modulus Operator

The expression

```c
x % y
```

produces the *remainder* when `x` is divided by `y`, and thus is zero when `y` divides `x` exactly.

<div class="alert-example">

A year is a leap year if it is divisible by 4 but not by 100, except that years divisible by 400 are leap years. Therefore

```c
if ((year % 4 == 0 && year % 100 != 0) || year % 400 == 0) {
    printf("%d is a leap year\n", year);
} else {
    printf("%d is not a leap year\n", year);
}
```

</div>

The `%` operator *cannot* be applied to a `float` or `double`.

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.3.5 Multiplicative operators][]

The operands of the `%` operator shall have integral type.

</div>

The direction of truncation for `/` and the sign of the result for `%` are *machine-dependent* for *negative operands*, as is the action taken on *overflow* or *underflow*.

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.3.5 Multiplicative operators][]

If either operand is *negative*,

- whether the result of the `/` operator is the largest integer less than the algebraic quotient or the smallest integer greater than the algebraic quotient is *implementation-defined*,
- as is the sign of the result of the `%` operator.

</div>

## Precedence

The *binary* `+` and `-` operators have the same precedence, which is lower than the precedence of `*`, `/` and `%`, which is in turn lower than *unary* `+` and `-`. Arithmetic operators associate left to right.

?> See also: [2-12][]

[2-12]: /notes/programming-language/c/c89/ch02/2-12
