# Arithmetic Expressions

In programming languages, arithmetic expressions consist of operators, operands, parentheses, and function calls.

An operator can be

- **Unary**, meaning it has a single operand.
- **Binary**, meaning it has two operands.
- **Ternary**, meaning it has three operands.

---

- In most programming languages, binary operators are **infix**, which means they appear between their operands.
- One exception is Perl, which has some operators that are **prefix**, which means they precede their operands.
- In Scheme and Lisp, all operators are prefix.
- Most unary operators are prefix, but the `++` and `--` operators of C-based languages can be either prefix or postfix.

---

The purpose of an arithmetic expression is to specify an arithmetic computation. An implementation of such a computation must cause two actions:

- Fetching the operands, usually from memory.
- Executing arithmetic operations on those operands.

## Operator Evaluation Order

The operator precedence and associativity rules of a language dictate the order of evaluation of its operators.

### Precedence

The value of an expression depends at least in part on the order of evaluation
of the operators in the expression.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following expression:

```ruby
a + b * c
```

Suppose the variables `a`, `b`, and `c` have the values 3, 4, and 5, respectively.

- If evaluated left to right (the addition first and then the multiplication), the result is 35.
- If evaluated right to left, the result is 23.

</div>

The **operator precedence rules** for expression evaluation partially define the order in which the operators of different precedence levels are evaluated.

- The operator precedence rules for expressions are based on the hierarchy of operator priorities, as seen by the language designer.
- The operator precedence rules of the common imperative languages are nearly all the same, because they are based on those of mathematics.

---

Many languages also include unary versions of addition and subtraction.

- *Unary addition* is called the **identity operator** because it usually has no associated operation and thus has no effect on its operand.

---

*Unary minus*, of course, changes the *sign* of its operand. In Java and C#, unary minus also causes the implicit conversion of `short` and `byte` operands to `int` type.

In all of the common imperative languages, the unary minus operator can appear in an expression either at the beginning or anywhere inside the expression, as long as it is parenthesized (`()`) to prevent it from being next to another operator.

<div class="alert-example">

```
a + (- b) * c
```

is legal, but

```
a + - b * c
```

usually is not.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Next, consider the following expressions:

```ruby
- a / b   # -(a/b) == (-a)/b
- a * b   # -(a*b) == (-a)*b
- a ** b  # -(a^b) != (-a)^b
```

In the first two cases, the relative precedence of the unary minus operator and the
binary operator is irrelevant—the order of evaluation of the two operators has
no effect on the value of the expression. In the last case, however, it does matter.

Of the common programming languages, only Fortran, Ruby, Visual
Basic, and Ada have the exponentiation operator. In all four, exponentiation
has higher precedence than unary minus, so

```ruby
- a ** b
```

is equivalent to

```ruby
-(a ** b)
```

</div>

The precedences of the arithmetic operators of Ruby and the C-based
languages are as follows:

|         | Ruby            | C-Based Languages                     |
| ------- | :-------------- | :------------------------------------ |
| Highest | `**`            | postfix `++`, `--`                    |
|         | unary `+`, `-`  | prefix `++`, `--`<br />unary `+`, `-` |
|         | `*`, `/`, `%`   | `*`, `/`, `%`                         |
| Lowest  | binary `+`, `-` | binary `+`, `-`                       |

- The `**` operator is exponentiation.
- The `%` operator takes two integer operands and yields the remainder of the first after division by the second.
- The `++` and `--` operators of the C-based languages are described in Section 7-7.

<div class="alert-example">

APL is odd among languages because it has a single level of precedence, as illustrated in the next section.

</div>

Precedence accounts for only some of the rules for the order of operator evaluation; associativity rules also affect it.

### Associativity

Consider the following expression:

```c
a - b + c - d // 若優先順序一樣，哪個運算子優先執行？
```

If the addition and subtraction operators have the same level of precedence, as they do in programming languages, the precedence rules say nothing about the order of evaluation of the operators in this expression.

When an expression contains two adjacent occurrences of operators with the same level of precedence, the question of which operator is evaluated first is answered by the **associativity** rules of the language.

An operator can have either left or right associativity, meaning that when there are two adjacent operators with the same precedence,

- the left operator is evaluated first or
- the right operator is evaluated first, respectively.

Associativity in common languages is left to right, except that the exponentiation operator (when provided) sometimes associates right to left.

<div class="alert-example">

In the Java expression

```java
a - b + c
```

the left operator is evaluated first.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Exponentiation in Fortran and Ruby is right associative, so in the expression

```ruby
A ** B ** C
```

the right operator is evaluated first.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Visual Basic, the exponentiation operator, `^`, is left associative.

</div>

The associativity rules for a few common languages are given here:

| Language | Associativity Rule                                     |
| -------- | :---------------------------------------------------- |
| Ruby     | Left: `*`, `/`, `+`, `-`                              |
|          | Right: `**`                                           |
| C-based  | languages Left: `*`, `/`, `%`, binary `+`, binary `-` |
|          | Right: `++`, `--`, unary `-`, unary `+`               |

<div class="alert-example">

In APL, all operators have the *same level* of precedence.

Thus, the order of evaluation of operators in APL expressions is determined entirely by the associativity rule, which is *right to left* for all operators.

In the expression

```apl
A × B + C
```

the addition operator is evaluated first, followed by the multiplication operator
(`×` is the APL multiplication operator). If `A` were 3, `B` were 4, and `C` were 5, then
the value of this APL expression would be 27.

</div>

***Mathematically Associative***

數學的結合律保證了以下等式成立，不受計算順序影響：

$$
(A + B) + C = A + (B + C)
$$

因此，數學上 $A + B + C$ 的結果與運算順序無關。

***Optimizations by Compiler***

If the compiler is allowed to *reorder* the evaluation of operators, it may be able to produce slightly faster code for expression evaluation. Compilers commonly do these kinds of optimizations.

***Floating-Point Operation***

Unfortunately, in a computer, both floating-point representations and floating-point arithmetic operations are only *approximations* of their mathematical counterparts (because of size limitations).

?> The fact that a mathematical operator is associative does not necessarily imply that the corresponding computer floating-point operation is associative.

***Pathological Situations***

整數運算中，在極端情況下會產生溢位，導致無法使用結合律調換順序來最佳化。

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose that a program must evaluate the expression

$$
A + B + C + D
$$

- $A$ and $C$ are very large positive numbers.
- $B$ and $D$ are negative numbers with very large absolute values.

In this situation,

- Adding B to A does not cause an overflow exception, but adding C to A does.
- Likewise, adding C to B does not cause overflow, but adding D to B does.

Because of the limitations of computer arithmetic, addition is catastrophically nonassociative in this case.

Therefore, if the compiler reorders these addition operations, it affects the value of the expression.

The expression could be specified as $(A + B) + (C + D)$ to avoid overflow.

</div>

### Parentheses

Programmers can alter the precedence and associativity rules by placing parentheses in expressions. A parenthesized part of an expression has precedence over its adjacent unparenthesized parts.

<div class="alert-example">

Although multiplication has precedence over addition, in the expression

```
(A + B) * C
```

the addition will be evaluated first. Mathematically, this is perfectly natural. In this expression, the first operand of the multiplication operator is not available until the addition in the parenthesized subexpression is evaluated.

</div>

***Advantage***

Languages that allow parentheses in arithmetic expressions could dispense with all precedence rules and simply associate all operators left to right or right to left.

- The programmer would specify the desired order of evaluation with parentheses.
- This approach would be simple because neither the author nor the readers of programs would need to remember any precedence or associativity rules.

***Disadvantage***

It makes writing expressions more tedious, and it also seriously compromises the readability of the code.

### Ruby Expressions

Recall that Ruby is a pure object-oriented language, which means, among other things, that every data value, including literals, is an object.

***Operators in Ruby***

- Ruby supports the collection of arithmetic and logic operations that are included in the C-based languages.
- What sets Ruby apart from the C-based languages in the area of expressions is that all of the arithmetic, relational, and assignment operators, as well as array indexing, shifts, and bitwise logic operators, are *implemented as methods*.

<div class="alert-example">

The expression `a + b` is a call to the *+ method* of the object referenced by `a`, passing the object referenced by `b` as a parameter.

</div>

One interesting result of the implementation of operators as methods is that they can be overridden by application programs.

- Therefore, these operators can be redefined.
- It is often not useful to redefine operators for predefined types.
- It is useful, as we will see in Section 7-3, to define predefined operators for user-defined types, which can be done with operator overloading in some languages.

***Operators in C++ and Ada***

In C++ and Ada, operators are actually *implemented as function calls*.

### Expressions in Lisp

As is the case with Ruby, all arithmetic and logic operations in Lisp are performed by *subprograms*. But in Lisp, the subprograms must be explicitly called.

<div class="alert-example">

To specify the C expression `a + b * c` in Lisp, one must write the following expression:

```lisp
(+ a (* b c))
```

In this expression, `+` and `*` are the names of functions.

</div>

### Conditional Expressions

$\textbf{if-then-else}$ statements can be used to perform a conditional expression
assignment.

Consider

```cpp
if (count == 0)
    average = 0;
else
    average = sum / count;
```

***Conditional Operator***

In the C-based languages, this code can be specified more conveniently in an assignment statement using a conditional expression, which has the following form:

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Conditional Operator ?:}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state expression\_1 \textbf{?} expression\_2 \textbf{:} expression\_3

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

where expression_1 is interpreted as a Boolean expression.

- If expression_1 evaluates to true, the value of the whole expression is the value of expression_2;
- Otherwise, it is the value of expression_3.

For example, the effect of the example $\textbf{if-then-else}$ can be achieved with the following assignment statement, using a conditional expression:

```cpp
average = (count == 0) ? 0 : sum / count;
```

In effect,

- The question (`?`) mark denotes the beginning of the $\textbf{then}$ clause.
- The colon (`:`) marks the beginning of the $\textbf{else}$ clause. Both clauses are mandatory.

Note that `?` is used in conditional expressions as a ternary operator.

Conditional expressions can be used anywhere in a program (in a C-based language) where any other expression can be used. In addition to the C-based languages, conditional expressions are provided in Perl, JavaScript, and Ruby.

## Operand Evaluation Order

A less commonly discussed design characteristic of expressions is the order of evaluation of operands.

- Variables in expressions are evaluated by fetching their values from memory.
- Constants are sometimes evaluated the same way.
- In other cases, a constant may be part of the machine language instruction and not require a memory fetch.
- If an operand is a parenthesized expression, all of the operators it contains must be evaluated before its value can be used as an operand.

If neither of the operands of an operator has side effects, then operand evaluation order is irrelevant.

Therefore, the only interesting case arises when the evaluation of an operand does have side effects.

### Side Effects

A **side effect** of a *function*, naturally called a functional side effect, occurs when the function changes either one of its parameters or a global variable.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following expression:

```
a + fun(a)
```

- If `fun` does not have the side effect of changing `a`, then the order of evaluation of the two operands, `a` and `fun(a)`, has no effect on the value of the expression.
- However, <mark>if `fun` changes `a`, there is an effect.</mark>

Consider the following situation: `fun` returns 10 and changes the value of its parameter to 20. Suppose we have
the following:

```
a = 10;
b = a + fun(a);
```

Then,

- If the value of `a` is fetched first (in the expression evaluation process), its value is 10 and the value of the expression is *20*.
- But if the second operand is evaluated first, then the value of the first operand is 20 and the value of the
expression is *30*.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The following C program illustrates the same problem when a function changes a global variable that appears in an expression:

```c
int a = 5;

int fun1() {
    a = 17;
    return 3;
}

void main() {
    a = a + fun1();
}
```

The value computed for `a` in `main` depends on the order of evaluation of the
operands in the expression `a + fun1()`.

The value of `a` will be

- 8 (if `a` is evaluated first).
- 20 (if the function call is evaluated first).

</div>

***No Functional Side Effect in Mathematics and Functional Programming Languages***

- There is no notion of variables.
- Functions are much easier to reason about and understand than those in imperative languages, because their context is irrelevant to their meaning.

***Solutions***

There are two possible solutions to the problem of operand evaluation order and side effects.

- First, the language designer could disallow function evaluation from affecting the value of expressions by simply disallowing functional side effects.
- Second, the language definition could state that operands in expressions are to be evaluated in a particular order and demand that implementors guarantee that order.

  <div class="alert-example">

    The Java language definition guarantees that operands appear to be evaluated in left-to-right order, eliminating the problem discussed in this section.

  </div>

Disallowing functional side effects in the imperative languages is difficult, and it eliminates some flexibility for the programmer.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the case of C and C++, which have only functions, meaning that all subprograms return one value.

- To eliminate the side effects of two-way parameters and still provide subprograms that return more than one value, the values would need to be placed in a struct and the struct returned.
- Access to globals in functions would also have to be disallowed.
- However, when efficiency is important, using access to global variables to avoid parameter passing is an important method of increasing execution speed.

</div>

In compilers, for example, global access to data such as the symbol table is commonplace.

The problem with having a strict evaluation order is that some code optimization
techniques used by compilers involve reordering operand evaluations.
A guaranteed order disallows those optimization methods when function calls
are involved.

There is, therefore, no perfect solution, as is borne out by actual language designs.

### Referential Transparency and Side Effects

The concept of referential transparency is related to and affected by functional side effects.

A program has the property of **referential transparency** if any two expressions in the program that have the same value can be substituted for one another anywhere in the program, without affecting the action of the program.

The value of a referentially transparent function depends entirely on its parameters. The connection of referential transparency and functional side effects is illustrated by the following example:

<div class="alert-example">

```
result1 = (fun(a) + b) / (fun(a) - c);
temp = fun(a);
result2 = (temp + b) / (temp - c);
```

If the function `fun` has no side effects, `result1` and `result2` will be equal, because the expressions assigned to them are equivalent.

However, suppose `fun` has the side effect of adding 1 to either `b` or `c`. Then `result1` would not be equal to `result2`. So, that side effect violates the referential transparency of the program in which the code appears.

</div>

***Advantages***

There are several advantages to referentially transparent programs.

- The most important of these is that the semantics of such programs is much easier to understand than the semantics of programs that are not referentially transparent.
- Being referentially transparent makes a function equivalent to a mathematical function, in terms of ease of understanding.

***In Pure Functional Languages***

Because they do not have variables, programs written in pure functional languages are referentially transparent.

- Functions in a pure functional language cannot have state, which would be stored in local variables.
- If such a function uses a value from outside the function, that value must be a constant, since there are no variables. Therefore, the value of the function depends on the values of its parameters.

Referential transparency will be further discussed in Chapter 15.
