# Overloaded Operators

?> The implementation of user-defined operator overloading is discussed in Chapter 9.

Arithmetic operators are often used for more than one purpose.

<div class="alert-example">

`+` usually is used to specify integer addition and floating-point addition.

Some languages—Java, for example—also use it for string catenation.

</div>

This multiple use of an operator is called **operator overloading** and is generally thought to be acceptable, as long as neither readability nor reliability suffers.

As an example of the possible dangers of overloading,

<div class="alert-example">

consider the use of the ampersand (`&`) in C++.

- As a binary operator, it specifies a bitwise logical AND operation.
- As a unary operator with a variable as its operand, the expression value is the address of that variable.

    In this case, the ampersand (`&`) is called the address-of operator. For example, the execution of

    ```cpp
    x = &y;
    ```

    causes the address of `y` to be placed in `x`.

There are two problems with this multiple use of the ampersand.

- First, using the same symbol for two completely unrelated operations is detrimental to readability.
- Second, the simple keying error of leaving out the first operand for a bitwise AND operation can go undetected by the compiler, because it is interpreted as an address-of operator. Such an error may be difficult to diagnose.

</div>

Virtually all programming languages have a less serious but similar problem, which is often due to the overloading of the minus (`-`) operator.

<div class="alert-example">

The problem is only that the compiler cannot tell if the operator (`-`) is meant to be binary or unary.

- So once again, failure to include the first operand when the operator is meant to be binary cannot be detected as an error by the compiler.
- However, the meanings of the two operations, unary and binary, are at least closely related, so readability is not adversely affected.

</div>

Some languages that support abstract data types (see Chapter 11), for example, C++, C#, and F#, allow the programmer to further overload operator symbols.

<div class="alert-example">

For instance, suppose a user wants to define the `*` operator between a scalar integer and an integer array to mean that each element of the array is to be multiplied by the scalar.

- Such an operator could be defined by writing a function subprogram named `*` that performs this new operation.
- The compiler will choose the correct meaning when an overloaded operator is specified, based on the types of the operands, as with language-defined overloaded operators.

For example, if this new definition for `*` is defined in a C# program, a C# compiler will use the new definition for `*` whenever the `*` operator appears with a simple integer as the left operand and an integer array as the right operand.

</div>

When sensibly used, user-defined operator overloading can aid readability.

<div class="alert-example">

If `+` and `*` are overloaded for a matrix abstract data type and `A`, `B`, `C`, and `D` are variables of that type, then

```
A * B + C * D
```

can be used instead of

```
MatrixAdd(MatrixMult(A, B), MatrixMult(C, D))
```

</div>

On the other hand, user-defined overloading can be harmful to readability.

<div class="alert-example">

For one thing, nothing prevents a user from defining `+` to mean multiplication.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Furthermore, seeing an `*` operator in a program, the reader must find both the types of the operands and the definition of the operator to determine its meaning.

Any or all of these definitions could be in other files.

</div>

C++ has a few operators that cannot be overloaded.

<div class="alert-example">

Among these are the class or structure member operator (`.`) and the scope resolution operator (`::`).

Interestingly, operator overloading was one of the C++ features that was not copied into Java. However, it did reappear in C#.

</div>

Another consideration is the process of building a software system from modules created by different groups. If the different groups overloaded the same operators in different ways, these differences would obviously need to be eliminated before putting the system together.
