# Type Conversions

Type conversions are either narrowing or widening.

- A **narrowing conversion** converts a value to a type that cannot store even approximations of all of the values of the original type.

  <div class="alert-example">

    Converting a `double` to a `float` in Java is a narrowing conversion, because the range of `double` is much larger than that of float.

  </div>

    Narrowing conversions are not always safe—sometimes the magnitude of the converted value is changed in the process.

  <div class="alert-example">

    If the floating-point value $1.3 \times 10^{25}$  is converted to an integer in a Java program, the result will not be in any way related to the original value.

  </div>

- A **widening conversion** converts a value to a type that can include at least approximations of all of the values of the original type.

    <div class="alert-example">

    Converting an `int` to a `float` in Java is a widening conversion.

    </div>

    Widening conversions are nearly always safe, meaning that the approximate magnitude of the converted value is maintained.

    Although widening conversions are usually safe, they can result in reduced accuracy. In many language implementations, although integer-to-floating-point conversions are widening conversions, some precision may be lost.

    <div class="alert-example">

    - In many cases, integers are stored in 32 bits, which allows at least 9 decimal digits of precision.
    - But floating-point values are also stored in 32 bits, with only about 7 decimal digits of precision (because of the space used for the exponent).

    So, integer-to-floating-point widening can result in the loss of two digits of precision.

    </div>

Coercions of nonprimitive types are, of course, more complex.

- In Chapter 5, the complications of assignment compatibility of array and record types were discussed.
- There is also the question of what parameter types and return types of a method allow it to override a method in a superclass—only when the types are the same, or also some other situations. That issue, as well as the concept of subclasses as subtypes, are discussed in Chapter 12.

Type conversions can be either explicit or implicit. The following two subsections discuss these kinds of type conversions.

## Coercion in Expressions

One of the design decisions concerning arithmetic expressions is whether an operator can have operands of different types. Languages that allow such expressions,

- which are called mixed-mode expressions,
- must define conventions for implicit operand type conversions
- because computers do not have binary operations that take operands of different types.

<div class="alert-note">

Recall that in Chapter 5,

- **coercion** was defined as an *implicit* type conversion that is initiated <mark>by the compiler or runtime system.</mark>

    When the two operands of an operator are not of the same type and that is legal in the language, the compiler must choose one of them to be coerced and generate the code for that coercion.

- Type conversions explicitly requested <mark>by the programmer</mark> are referred to as *explicit conversions*, or **casts**, not coercions.

</div>

***Controversy***

Language designers are not in agreement on the issue of coercions in arithmetic expressions.

- Those against a broad range of coercions are concerned with the reliability problems that can result from such coercions, because they reduce the benefits of *type checking*.
- Those who would rather include a wide range of coercions are more concerned with the loss in *flexibility* that results from restrictions.

The issue is whether programmers should need to be concerned with this category of errors or whether the compiler should detect them.

<div class="alert-example">

As a simple illustration of the problem, consider the following Java code:

```java
int a;
float b, c, d;
...
d = b * a;
```

Assume that the second operand of the multiplication operator was supposed to be `c`, but because of a keying error it was typed as `a`.

- Because mixed-mode expressions are legal in Java, the compiler would not detect this as an error.
- It would simply insert code to coerce the value of the `int` operand, `a`, to `float`.
- If mixed-mode expressions were not legal in Java, this keying error would have been detected by the compiler as a type error.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Because error detection is reduced when mixed-mode expressions are allowed, F#, Ada, and ML do not allow them.

For example, they do not allow mixing of integer and floating-point operands in expressions.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In most of the other common languages, there are no restrictions on mixed-mode arithmetic expressions.

- The C-based languages have integer types that are smaller than the `int` type.
- In Java, these are `byte` and `short`.
- Operands of all of these types are coerced to `int` whenever virtually any operator is applied to them.

So, while data can be stored in variables of these types, it cannot be manipulated before conversion to a larger type. For example, consider the following Java code:

```java
byte a, b, c;
...
a = b + c;
```

<div class="stepper">

- <div>

    The values of `b` and `c` are coerced to `int` and an `int` addition is performed.

  </div>
- <div>

    Then, the sum is converted to `byte` and put in `a`.

  </div>

</div>

Given the large size of the memories of contemporary computers, there is little incentive to use `byte` and `short`, unless a large number of them must be stored.

</div>

## Explicit Type Conversion

Most languages provide some capability for doing explicit conversions, both widening and narrowing.

In some cases, warning messages are produced when an explicit narrowing conversion results in a significant change to the value of the object being converted.

<div class="alert-example">

In the C-based languages, explicit type conversions are called **casts**. To specify a cast, the desired type is placed in parentheses just before the expression to be converted, as in

```c
(int)angle
```

One of the reasons for the parentheses around the type name in these conversions is that the first of these languages, C, has several two-word type names, such as `long int`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In ML and F#, the casts have the *syntax of function calls*.

In F# we could have the following:

```fsharp
float(sum)
```

</div>

## Errors in Expressions

A number of errors can occur during expression evaluation.

- If the language requires type checking, either static or dynamic, then operand type errors cannot occur. The errors that can occur because of coercions of operands in expressions have already been discussed.
- The other kinds of errors are due to the limitations of computer arithmetic and the inherent limitations of arithmetic.

The most common error occurs when the result of an operation cannot be represented in the memory cell where it must be stored.

- This is called *overflow* or *underflow*, depending on whether the result was too large or too small.
- One limitation of arithmetic is that division by zero is disallowed. Of course, the fact that it is not mathematically allowed does not prevent a program from attempting to do it.

Floating-point overflow, underflow, and division by zero are examples
of run-time errors, which are sometimes called **exceptions**. Language facilities
that allow programs to detect and deal with exceptions are discussed in
Chapter 14.
