# Short-Circuit Evaluation

A **short-circuit evaluation** of an expression is one in which the result is determined
without evaluating all of the operands and/or operators.

<div class="alert-example">

The value of the arithmetic expression

```
(13 * a) * (b / 13 - 1)
```

is independent of the value of `(b / 13 - 1)` if `a` is 0, because `0 * x = 0` for any `x`. So, when `a` is 0, there is no need to evaluate `(b / 13 - 1)` or perform the second multiplication.

However, in arithmetic expressions, this shortcut is not easily detected during execution, so it is never taken.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The value of the Boolean expression

```
(a >= 0) && (b < 10)
```

is independent of the second relational expression if `a < 0`, because the expression `(FALSE && (b < 10))` is `FALSE` for all values of `b`. So, when `a` is less than zero, there is no need to evaluate `b`, the constant 10, the second relational expression, or the `&&` operation.

Unlike the case of arithmetic expressions, this shortcut easily can be discovered during execution.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

To illustrate a potential problem with non-short-circuit evaluation of Boolean expressions,

?> suppose Java did *not* use short-circuit evaluation.

A table lookup loop could be written using the `while` statement. One simple version of Java code for such a lookup, assuming that `list`, which has `listLen` elements, is the array to be searched and `key` is the searched-for value, is

```java
index = 0;
while ((index < listLen) && (list[index] != key))
    index = index + 1;
```

If evaluation is not short-circuit, both relational expressions in the Boolean expression of the `while` statement are evaluated, regardless of the value of the first.

- Thus, if `key` is not in `list`, the program will terminate with a subscript *out-of-range exception*.
- The same iteration that has `index == listLen` will reference `list[listLen]`, which causes the indexing error because list is declared to have `listLen - 1` as an upper-bound subscript value.

?> If a language provides short-circuit evaluation of Boolean expressions and it is used, this is not a problem.

In the preceding example, a short-circuit evaluation scheme would evaluate the first operand of the AND operator, but it would skip the second operand if the first operand is false.

</div>

***Side Eeffects***

A language that provides short-circuit evaluations of Boolean expressions and also has side effects in expressions allows subtle errors to occur.

Suppose that short-circuit evaluation is used on an expression and part of the expression that contains a side effect is not evaluated; then the side effect will occur only in complete evaluations of the whole expression. If program correctness depends on the side effect, short-circuit evaluation can result in a serious error.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the Java expression

```java
(a > b) || ((b++) / 3)  // 關係表達式 (a > b) 為 false 時
                        // 才需要判斷後續的算式表達式 ((b++) / 3)
                        // 只有這個時刻才會遞增 `b` 的值
```

In this expression, `b` is changed (in the second arithmetic expression) only when `a <= b`.

If the programmer assumed `b` would be changed every time this expression is evaluated during execution (and the program’s correctness depends on it), the program will fail.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In the C-based languages, the usual AND and OR operators, `&&` and `||`, respectively, are short-circuit.

However, these languages also have bitwise AND and OR operators, `&` and `|`, respectively, that can be used on Boolean-valued operands and are not short-circuit.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

All of the logical operators of Ruby, Perl, ML, F#, and Python are short-circuit evaluated.

</div>
