# Assignment Statements

The assignment statement is one of the central constructs in imperative languages. It provides the mechanism by which the user can dynamically change the bindings of values to variables.

## Simple Assignments

<div class="alert-example">

Nearly all programming languages currently being used use the equal (`=`) sign for the assignment operator. All of these must use something different from an equal sign for the equality relational operator to avoid confusion with their assignment operator.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Ada and ALGOL 60 pioneered the use of `:=` as the assignment operator, which avoids the confusion of assignment with equality.

</div>

## Conditional Targets

<div class="alert-example">

Perl allows conditional targets on assignment statements. Consider

```perl
($flag ? $count1 : $count2) = 0;
```

which is equivalent to

```perl
if ($flag) {
    $count1 = 0;
} else {
    $count2 = 0;
}
```

</div>

## Compound Assignment Operators

A **compound assignment operator** is a shorthand method of specifying a commonly needed form of assignment.

<div class="alert-example">

Compound assignment operators were introduced by ALGOL 68, were later adopted in a slightly different form by C, and are part of the other C-based languages, as well as Perl, JavaScript, Python, and Ruby.

The form of assignment that can be abbreviated with this technique has the destination variable also appearing as the first operand in the expression on the right side, as in

```c
a = a + b
```

The syntax of these assignment operators is the catenation of the desired binary operator to the `=` operator. For example,

```c
sum += value;
```

is equivalent to

```
sum = sum + value;
```

The languages that support compound assignment operators have versions for most of their binary operators.

</div>

## Unary Assignment Operators

The C-based languages, Perl, and JavaScript include two special unary arithmetic operators that are actually abbreviated assignments.

They combine increment and decrement operations with assignment.

- The operators `++` for increment and `--` for decrement can be used either in expressions or to form stand-alone single-operator assignment statements.

They can appear either as

- prefix operators, meaning that they precede the operands.
- postfix operators, meaning that they follow the operands.

<div class="alert-example">

?> Prefix

In the assignment statement

```c
sum = ++count;
```

the value of `count` is incremented by 1 and then assigned to `sum`. This operation could also be stated as

```c
count = count + 1;
sum = count;
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

?> Postfix

In the assignment statement

```c
sum = count++;
```

the assignment of the value of `count` to `sum` occurs first; then `count` is incremented. The effect is the same as that of the two statements

```c
sum = count;
count = count + 1;
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

An example of the use of the unary increment operator to form a complete assignment statement is

```c
count++;
```

which simply increments `count`. It does not look like an assignment, but it certainly is one. It is equivalent to the statement

```c
count = count + 1;
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

When two unary operators apply to the same operand, the association is right to left. For example, in

```c
- count ++
```

`count` is first incremented and then negated. So, it is equivalent to

```c
- (count ++)
```

rather than

```c
(- count) ++
```

</div>

## Assignment as an Expression

In the C-based languages, Perl, and JavaScript, the assignment statement produces a result, which is the same as the value assigned to the target.

<div class="alert-example">

In C, it is common to write statements such as

```c
while ((ch = getchar()) != EOF) { ... }
```

- In this statement, the next character from the standard input file, usually the keyboard, is gotten with `getchar` and assigned to the variable `ch`.
- The result, or value assigned, is then compared with the constant `EOF`.
- If `ch` is not equal to `EOF`, the compound statement `{...}` is executed.

Note that the assignment must be parenthesized—in the languages that support assignment as an expression, the precedence of the assignment operator is lower than that of the relational operators.

- Without the parentheses, the new character would be compared with `EOF` first.
- Then, the result of that comparison, either `0` or `1`, would be assigned to `ch`.

</div>

***Disadvantage***

The disadvantage of allowing assignment statements to be operands in expressions is that it provides yet another kind of expression side effect.

- This type of side effect can lead to expressions that are difficult to read and understand.
- Such an expression cannot be read as an expression, which in mathematics is a denotation of a value, but only as a list of instructions with an odd order of execution.

<div class="alert-example">

The expression

```
a = b + (c = d / b) - 1
```

denotes the instructions

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Order of Instructions}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state Assign d / b to c
\state Assign b + c to temp
\state Assign temp $-$ 1 to a

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

</div>

Note that the treatment of the assignment operator as any other binary operator allows the effect of *multiple-target assignments*.

<div class="alert-example">

```
sum = count = 0;
```

in which `count` is first assigned the zero, and then `count`’s value is assigned to `sum`. This form of multiple-target assignments is also legal in Python.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

There is a loss of error detection in the C design of the assignment operation that frequently leads to program errors. In particular, if we type

```c
if (x = y) ...
```

instead of

```c
if (x == y) ...
```

which is an easily made mistake, it is not detectable as an error by the compiler.

Rather than testing a relational expression, the value that is assigned to
`x` is tested (in this case, it is the value of `y` that reaches this statement).

This is actually a result of two design decisions:

- Allowing assignment to behave like an ordinary binary operator.
- Using two very similar operators, `=` and `==`, to have completely different meanings.

This is another example of the safety deficiencies of C and C++ programs. Note that Java and C# allow only `boolean` expressions in their `if` statements, disallowing this problem.

</div>

## Multiple Assignments

Several recent programming languages, including Perl and Ruby provide multiple-target, multiple-source assignment statements.

<div class="alert-example">

In Perl one can write

```perl
($first, $second, $third) = (20, 40, 60);
```

The semantics is that

- 20 is assigned to `$first`.
- 40 is assigned to `$second`.
- 60 is assigned to `$third`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

If the values of two variables must be interchanged, this can be done with a single assignment, as with

```perl
($first, $second) = ($second, $first);
```

This correctly interchanges the values of `$first` and `$second`, without the use of a temporary variable (at least one created and managed by the programmer).

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The syntax of the simplest form of Ruby’s multiple assignment is similar to that of Perl, except the left and right sides are not parenthesized. Also, Ruby includes a few more elaborate versions of multiple assignments, which are not discussed here.

</div>

## Assignment in Functional Programming Languages

All of the identifiers used in pure functional languages and some of them used in other functional languages are just names of values. As such, <mark>their values never change.</mark>

<div class="alert-example">

In ML, names are bound to values with the `val` declaration, whose form is exemplified in the following:

```ml
val cost = quantity * price;
```

If `cost` appears on the left side of a subsequent `val` declaration, that declaration creates a *new version* of the name `cost`, which has no relationship with the previous version, which is then hidden.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

F# has a somewhat similar declaration that uses the `let` reserved word.

The difference between F#’s `let` and ML’s `val` is that `let` creates a new scope, whereas `val` does not.

In fact, `val` declarations are often nested in `let` constructs in ML. `let` and `val` are further discussed in Chapter 15.

</div>
