# Selection Statements

A **selection statement** provides the means of choosing between two or more execution paths in a program. Selection statements fall into two general categories:

- Two-way and n-way.
- Multiple selection.

## Two-Way Selection Statements

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{The General Form of a Two-Way Selector}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{if} control\_expression
\state $\hspace{2em}$ then clause
\state $\hspace{2em}$ else clause

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

### The Control Expression

<div class="alert-example">

Control expressions are specified in parentheses if the `then` reserved word is not used to introduce the $\textbf{then}$ clause.

```ruby
if (x > 10)
    puts "x is greater than 10"
end
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In those cases where the `then` reserved word is used, there is less need for the parentheses, so they are often omitted.

```ruby
if x > 10 then
    puts "x is greater than 10"
end
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- In C89, which did *not* have a Boolean data type, arithmetic expressions were used as control expressions.
- This can also be done in Python, C99, and C++. However, in those languages either arithmetic or Boolean expressions can be used.
- In other contemporary languages, *only* Boolean expressions can be used for control expressions.

</div>

### Clause Form

In many languages, the $\textbf{then}$ and $\textbf{else}$ clauses appear as either

- single statements or
- compound statements.

<div class="alert-example">

One variation of this is Perl, in which all $\textbf{then}$ and $\textbf{else}$ clauses must be compound statements, even if they have only one statement.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Many languages use braces (`{}`) to form compound statements, which serve as the bodies of $\textbf{then}$ and $\textbf{else}$ clauses.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Python and Ruby, the $\textbf{then}$ and $\textbf{else}$ clauses are statement sequences, rather than compound statements. The complete selection statement is terminated in these languages with a reserved word.

Python uses indentation to specify compound statements. For example,

```python
if x > y :
    x = y
    print "case 1"
```

All statements equally indented are included in the compound statement. Notice that rather than `then`, a colon (`:`) is used to introduce the $\textbf{then}$ clause in Python.

</div>

### Nesting Selectors

***Static Semantics Rule***

Recall that in Chapter 3, we discussed the problem of syntactic ambiguity of a straightforward grammar for a two-way selector statement.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{An Ambiguous Grammar for a Two-way Selector Statement}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state <if\_stmt> → \textbf{if} <logic\_expr> \textbf{then} <stmt>
\state $\hspace{5.6em}$ | \textbf{if} <logic\_expr> \textbf{then} <stmt> \textbf{else} <stmt>

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The issue is that when a selection statement is nested in the $\textbf{then}$ clause of a selection statement, it is not clear with <mark>which $\textbf{if}$ an $\textbf{else}$ clause should be associated.</mark> This problem is reflected in the semantics of selection statements.

Consider the following Java-like code:

```java
if (sum == 0)
    if (count == 0)
        result = 0;
else                // 只有 python 與 F# 能利用縮排來指定 else 匹配的對象
    result = 1;     // 在沒有使用語法來明確指示對象時，大部分語言通常都是匹配至最近的 if
```

This statement can be interpreted in two different ways, depending on whether the $\textbf{else}$ clause is matched with the first $\textbf{then}$ clause or the second.

Notice that the indentation seems to indicate that the $\textbf{else}$ clause belongs with the first $\textbf{then}$ clause. However, with the exceptions of Python and F#, indentation has no effect on semantics in contemporary languages and is therefore ignored by their compilers.

The crux of the problem in this example is that the $\textbf{else}$ clause follows two $\textbf{then}$ clauses with no intervening $\textbf{else}$ clause, and there is no syntactic indicator to specify a matching of the $\textbf{else}$ clause to one of the $\textbf{then}$ clauses.

?> In Java, as in many other imperative languages, the static semantics of the language specify that the $\textbf{else}$ clause is always paired with the *nearest* previous unpaired $\textbf{then}$ clause.

A static semantics rule, rather than a syntactic entity, is used to provide the disambiguation.

- So, in the example, the $\textbf{else}$ clause would be paired with the second $\textbf{then}$ clause.
- The disadvantage of using a rule rather than some syntactic entity is that although the programmer may have meant the $\textbf{else}$ clause to be the alternative to the first $\textbf{then}$ clause and the compiler found the structure syntactically correct, its semantics is the opposite.

***Syntactic Entity `{}`***

<div class="alert-example">

To force the alternative semantics in Java, the inner `if` is put in a compound, as in

```java
if (sum == 0) {
    if (count == 0)
        result = 0;
} else
    result = 1;
```

C, C++, and C# have the same problem as Java with selection statement nesting.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Perl requires that all $\textbf{then}$ and $\textbf{else}$ clauses be compound. In Perl, the previous code would be written as follows:

```perl
if (sum == 0) {
    if (count == 0) {
        result = 0;
    }
} else {
    result = 1;
}
```

If the alternative semantics were needed, it would be

```perl
if (sum == 0) {
    if (count == 0) {
        result = 0;
    } else {
        result = 1;
    }
}
```

</div>

Another way to avoid the issue of nested selection statements is to use an alternative means of forming compound statements.

<div class="alert-example">

The use of a special word for this purpose resolves the question of the semantics of nested selectors and also adds to the readability of the statement. This is the design of the selection statement in Ruby.

Consider the following Ruby statement:

```ruby
if a > b then
    sum = sum + a
    aCount = aCount + 1
else
    sum = sum + b
    bCount = bCount + 1
end
```

The design of this statement is more regular than that of the selection statements of the C-based languages, because the form is the same regardless of the number of statements in the $\textbf{then}$ and $\textbf{else}$ clauses. (This is also true for Perl.)

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Recall that in Ruby, the $\textbf{then}$ and $\textbf{else}$ clauses consist of statement sequences rather than compound statements.

```
if (sum == 0)
    if (count == 0)
        result = 0;
else
    result = 1;
```

- The first interpretation: The $\textbf{else}$ clause is matched to the nested $\textbf{if}$, can be written in Ruby as follows:

    ```ruby
    if sum == 0 then
        if count == 0 then
            result = 0
        else
            result = 1
        end
    end
    ```

    Because the `end` reserved word closes the nested `if`, it is clear that the $\textbf{else}$ clause is matched to the inner $\textbf{then}$ clause.

- The second interpretation: The $\textbf{else}$ clause is matched to the outer `if`, can be written in Ruby as follows:

    ```ruby
    if sum == 0 then
        if count == 0 then
            result = 0
        end
    else
        result = 1
    end
    ```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The following statement, written in Python, is semantically equivalent to the last Ruby statement above:

```python
if sum == 0 :
    if count == 0 :
        result = 0
else:
    result = 1
```

If the line `else`: were indented to begin in the same column as the nested $\textbf{if}$, the $\textbf{else}$ clause would be matched with the inner `if`.

```python
if sum == 0 :
    if count == 0 :
        result = 0
    else:
        result = 1
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

ML does not have a problem with nested selectors because it does not allow else-less `if` statements.

</div>

### Selector Expressions

In the *functional languages* ML, F#, and LISP, <mark>the selector is not a statement; it is an expression</mark> that results in a value. Therefore, it can appear anywhere any other expression can appear.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following example selector written in F#:

```fsharp
let y =
    if x > 0 then x
    else 2 * x;;
```

This creates the name `y` and sets it to either `x` or `2 * x`, depending on whether `x` is greater than zero.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In F#,

- the type of the value returned by the $\textbf{then}$ clause of an $\textbf{if}$ construct must be the same as that of the value returned by its $\textbf{else}$ clause.
- If there is no $\textbf{else}$ clause, the $\textbf{then}$ clause cannot return a value of a normal type.
- In this case, it can only return a unit type, which is a special type that means no value. A unit type is represented in code as `()`.

</div>

## Multiple-Selection Statements

The **multiple-selection** statement allows the selection of one of any number of statements or statement groups. It is, therefore, a generalization of a selector. In fact, two-way selectors can be built with a multiple selector.

The C multiple-selector statement, `switch`, which is also part of C++, Java, and JavaScript, is a relatively primitive design.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{General Form of switch}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{switch} (expression) \{
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{case} constant\_expression$_1$ \textbf{:}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ statement$_1$;
\state $\hspace{2em}$ ...
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{case} constant$_n$ \textbf{:}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ statement$_n$;
\state $\hspace{2em}$ [\textbf{default} \textbf{:}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ statement$_{n + 1}$]
\state \}

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

- The control expression and the constant expressions are some discrete type. This includes integer types, as well as characters and enumeration types.
- The selectable statements can be statement sequences, compound statements, or blocks.
- The optional `default` segment is for unrepresented values of the control expression. If the value of the control expression is not represented and no default segment is present, then the statement does nothing.

<div class="alert-example">

The `switch` statement does not provide implicit branches at the end of its code segments. This allows control to flow through more than one selectable code segment on a single execution.

Consider the following example:

```c
switch (index) {
    case 1:
    case 3:
        odd += 1;
        sumOdd += index;
    case 2:
    case 4:
        even += 1;
        sumEven += index;
    default:
        printf("Error in switch, index = %d\n", index);
}
```

This code prints the error message on every execution. Likewise, the code for the 2 and 4 constants is executed every time the code at the 1 or 3 constants is executed.

To separate these segments logically, an *explicit branch* must be included. The `break` statement, which is actually a restricted goto, is normally used for exiting `switch` statements. `break` transfers control to the first statement after the compound statement in which it appears.

The following `switch` statement uses `break` to restrict each execution to a single selectable segment:

```c
switch (index) {
    case 1:
    case 3:
        odd += 1;
        sumOdd += index;
        break;
    case 2:
    case 4:
        even += 1;
        sumEven += index;
        break;
    default:
        printf("Error in switch, index = %d\n", index);
}
```

Occasionally, it is convenient to allow control to flow from one selectable code segment to another.

- In the example above, the segments for the case values 1 and 2 are empty, allowing control to flow to the segments for 3 and 4, respectively.
- This is the reason why there are no implicit branches in the `switch` statement.
- The reliability problem with this design arises when the mistaken absence of a `break` statement in a segment allows control to flow to the next segment incorrectly.

?> Studies have shown that the ability to have control flow from one selectable segment to another is rarely used.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The C `switch` statement has virtually no restrictions on the placement of the case expressions, which are treated as if they were normal statement labels. This laxness can result in highly complex structure within the switch body.

```c
switch (x)
    default:
    if (prime(x))
        case 2: case 3: case 5: case 7:
        process_prime(x);
    else
        case 4: case 6: case 8: case 9: case 10:
        process_composite(x);
```

This code may appear to have diabolically complex form, but it was designed for a real problem and works correctly and efficiently to solve that problem.

The Java switch prevents this sort of complexity by disallowing case expressions from appearing anywhere except the top level of the body of the switch.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The C# switch statement differs from that of its C-based predecessors in two ways.

First, C# has a static semantics rule that disallows the implicit execution of more than one segment. The rule is that every selectable segment must end with an explicit unconditional branch statement: either

- a `break`, which transfers control out of the `switch` statement, or
- a `goto`, which can transfer control to one of the selectable segments (or virtually anywhere else).

For example,

```csharp
switch (value) {
    case -1:
        Negatives++;
        break;
    case 0:
        Zeros++;
        goto case 1;
    case 1:
        Positives++;
    default:
        Console.WriteLine("Error in switch \n");
}
```

The other way C#’s `switch` differs from that of its predecessors is that the control expression and the case statements can be strings in C#.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

PHP’s `switch` uses the syntax of C’s `switch` but allows more type flexibility.

- The case values can be any of the PHP scalar types—string, integer, or double precision.
- As with C, if there is no `break` at the end of the selected segment, execution continues into the next segment.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Ruby has two forms of multiple-selection constructs, both of which are called *case expressions* and both of which yield the value of the last expression evaluated.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Ruby’s Case Expressions}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{case}
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{when} Boolean\_expression \textbf{then} expression
\state $\hspace{2em}$ ...
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{when} Boolean\_expression \textbf{then} expression
\state $\hspace{2em}$ [\textbf{else} expression]
\state \textbf{end}

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

- The semantics of this case expression is that the Boolean expressions are evaluated one at a time, top to bottom.
- The value of the case expression is the value of the first then expression whose Boolean expression is true.
- The `else` represents true in this statement, and the $\textbf{else}$ clause is optional.

For example,

```ruby
leap =  case
            when year % 400 == 0 then true
            when year % 100 == 0 then false
            else year % 4 == 0
        end
```

This case expression evaluates to true if `year` is a leap year.

The other Ruby case expression form is similar to the `switch` of Java.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Perl and Python do not have multiple-selection statements.

</div>

### Implementing Multiple Selection Structures

A multiple selection statement is essentially an n-way branch to segments of code, where n is the number of selectable segments. Implementing such a statement must be done with multiple conditional branch instructions.

Consider again the general form of the C switch statement, with breaks:

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{General Form of switch With breaks}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{switch} (expression) \{
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{case} constant\_expression$_1$ \textbf{:}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ statement$_1$;
\state $\hspace{4em}$ break;
\state $\hspace{2em}$ ...
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{case} constant$_n$ \textbf{:}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ statement$_n$;
\state $\hspace{4em}$ break;
\state $\hspace{2em}$ [\textbf{default} \textbf{:}
\state $\hspace{4em}$ statement$_{n + 1}$]
\state \}

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

***Simple Translation***

One simple translation of this statement follows:

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Code To Evaluate Expression Into t}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{goto} branches
\state label$_1$:
\state $\hspace{2em}$ code for statement$_1$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} out
\state ...
\state label$_n$:
\state $\hspace{2em}$ code for statement$_n$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} out
\state \textbf{default}:
\state $\hspace{2em}$ code for statement$_{n + 1}$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} out
\state branches:
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} t = constant\_expression$_1$ \textbf{goto} label$_1$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ ...
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} t = constant\_expression$_n$ \textbf{goto} label$_n$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} default
\state out:

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The code for the selectable segments precedes the branches so that the targets of the branches are all known when the branches are generated.

***Linear Search Table***

An alternative to these coded conditional branches is to put the case values and labels in a *table*
and use a *linear search* with a loop to find the correct label.

- This requires less space than the coded conditionals.
- The use of conditional branches or a linear search on a table of cases and labels is a simple but inefficient approach that is acceptable when the number of cases is small, say less than 10.
- It takes an average of about half as many tests as there are cases to find the right one.
- For the default case to be chosen, all other cases must be tested.

***Hash Table***

When the number of cases is 10 or greater, the compiler can build a *hash table* of the segment labels, which would result in approximately equal (and short) times to choose any of the selectable segments.

***Binary Search Table***

If the language allows ranges of values for case expressions, as in Ruby, the hash method is not suitable. For these situations, a *binary search table* of case values and segment addresses is better.

***Array Indexing***

If the range of the case values is relatively small and more than half of the whole range of values is represented, an *array* whose indices are the case values and whose values are the segment labels can be built.

- Array elements whose indices are not among the represented case values are filled with the default segment’s label.
- Then finding the correct segment label is found by array indexing, which is very fast.

***Compiler***

Of course, choosing among these approaches is an additional burden on the compiler. In many compilers, only two different methods are used. As in other situations, determining and using the most efficient method costs more compiler time.

### Multiple Selection Using if

In many situations, a `switch` or `case` statement is inadequate for multiple selection (Ruby’s `case` is an exception). For example, <mark>when selections must be made on the basis of a Boolean expression</mark> rather than some ordinal type, nested two-way selectors can be used to simulate a multiple selector.

<div class="alert-example">

To alleviate the poor readability of deeply nested two-way selectors, some languages, such as Perl and Python, have been extended specifically for this use.

The extension allows some of the special words to be left out. In particular, else-if sequences are replaced with a single special word, and the closing special word on the nested `if` is dropped. The nested selector is then called an $\textbf{else-if}$ clause.

Consider the following Python selector statement (note that $\textbf{else-if}$ is spelled `elif` in Python):

```python
if count < 10 :
    bag1 = True
elif count < 100 :
    bag2 = True
elif count < 1000 :
    bag3 = True
else :
    bag4 = True
```

which is equivalent to the following:

```python
if count < 10 :
    bag1 = True
else :
    if count < 100 :
        bag2 = True
    else :
        if count < 1000 :
            bag3 = True
        else :
            bag4 = True
```

The else-if version (the first) is the more readable of the two.

Notice that this example is not easily simulated with a `switch` statement,

- because each selectable statement is chosen on the basis of a Boolean expression.
- Therefore, the else-if statement is not a redundant form of `switch`. In fact, none of the multiple selectors in contemporary languages are as general as the if-then-else-if statement.

</div>

An operational semantics description of a general selector statement
with else-if clauses, in which the $E$’s are logic expressions and the $S$’s are statements,
is given here:

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Operational Semantics Description of Else-If}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} E$_1$ \textbf{goto} 1
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} E$_2$ \textbf{goto} 2
\state $\hspace{2em}$ ...
\state 1: S$_1$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} out
\state 2: S$_2$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} out
\state ...
\state out: ...

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

From this description, we can see the difference between multiple selection structures and else-if statements: In a multiple selection statement, all the $E$’s would be restricted to comparisons between the value of a single expression and some other values.

<div class="alert-example">

Languages that do not include the else-if statement can use the same control structure, with only slightly more typing.

The Python example if-then-else-if statement above can be written as the Ruby `case` statement:

```ruby
case
    when count < 10 then bag1 = true
    when count < 100 then bag2 = true
    when count < 1000 then bag3 = true
    else bag4 = true
end
```

</div>

Else-if statements are based on the common mathematics statement, the conditional expression.

<div class="alert-example">

The Scheme multiple selector, which is based on mathematical conditional expressions, is a special form function named `COND`.

`COND` is a slightly generalized version of the mathematical conditional expression;

- it allows more than one predicate to be true at the same time.
- Because different mathematical conditional expressions have different numbers of parameters, `COND` does not require a fixed number of actual parameters.
- Each parameter to `COND` is a pair of expressions in which the first is a predicate (it evaluates to either `#T` or `#F`).
- The `ELSE` clause is optional.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{General Form of COND}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state (\textbf{COND}
\state $\hspace{2em}$ (predicate$_1$ expression$_1$)
\state $\hspace{2em}$ (predicate$_2$ expression$_2$)
\state $\hspace{2em}$ ...
\state $\hspace{2em}$ (predicate$_n$ expression$_n$)
\state $\hspace{2em}$ [(\textbf{ELSE} expression$_{n + 1}$)]
\state )

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The semantics of `COND` is as follows:

- The predicates of the parameters are evaluated one at a time, in order from the first, until one evaluates to `#T`.
- The expression that follows the first predicate that is found to be `#T` is then evaluated and its value is returned as the value of `COND`.
- If none of the predicates is true and there is an `ELSE`, its expression is evaluated and the value is returned.
- If none of the predicates is true and there is no `ELSE`, the value of `COND` is unspecified. Therefore, all `COND`s should include an `ELSE`.

Consider the following example call to `COND`:

```scheme
(COND
    ((> x y) "x is greater than y")
    ((< x y) "y is greater than x")
    (ELSE "x and y are equal")
)
```

Note that string literals evaluate to themselves, so that when this call to `COND` is evaluated, it produces a string result.

</div>
