# Iterative Statements

An **iterative statement** is one that causes a statement or collection of statements to be executed zero, one, or more times. An iterative statement is often called a **loop**.

The **body** of an iterative statement is the collection of statements whose execution is controlled by the iteration statement. We use the term

- **pretest** to mean that the test for loop completion occurs before the loop body is executed.
- **posttest** to mean that it occurs after the loop body is executed.

## Counter-Controlled Loops

A counting iterative control statement has a variable, called the **loop variable**, in which the count value is maintained.

- It also includes some means of specifying the **initial** and **terminal** values of the loop variable, and
- the difference between sequential loop variable values, often called the **stepsize**.

The initial, terminal, and stepsize specifications of a loop are called the **loop parameters**.

### The for Statement of the C-Based Languages

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{The General Form of C’s for Statement}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{for} (expression$_1$; expression$_2$; expression$_3$)
\state $\hspace{2em}$ loop body

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The loop body can be a single statement, a compound statement, or a null statement.

***Expressions in `for` Statement***

Because <mark>assignment statements in C *produce results* and thus can be considered expressions</mark>, the expressions in a `for` statement are often assignment statements.

- The first expression ($\textbf{expression}_1$) is for initialization and is evaluated only once, when the `for` statement execution begins.
- The second expression ($\textbf{expression}_2$) is the loop control and is evaluated before each execution of the loop body.

    As is usual in C, a zero value means false and all nonzero values mean true. Therefore, if the value of the second expression is zero, the `for` is terminated; otherwise, the loop body statements are executed.

    In C99, the expression also could be a Boolean type. A C99 Boolean type stores only the values 0 or 1.

- The last expression ($\textbf{expression}_3$) in the `for` is executed after each execution of the loop body. It is often used to increment the loop counter.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{An Operational Semantics Description of The C for Statement}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state $\hspace{2em}$ expression$_1$
\state loop:
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} expression$_2$ = 0 \textbf{goto} out
\state $\hspace{2em}$ [loop body]
\state $\hspace{2em}$ expression$_3$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} loop
\state out: ...

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

Because C expressions can be used as statements, expression evaluations are shown as statements.

<div class="alert-example">

A skeletal C for statement:

```c
for (count = 1; count <= 10; count++) {
    ...
}
```

</div>

***All of the Expressions of C’s `for` Are Optional.***

- An absent second expression is considered true, so a `for` without one is potentially an infinite loop.
- If the first and/or third expressions are absent, no assumptions are made. For example, if the first expression is absent, it simply means that no initialization takes place.

Note that C’s `for` need not count. It can easily model counting and logical loop structures, as demonstrated in the next section.

***The C `for` Design Choices Are the Following:***

- There is no explicit loop variable and no loop parameters.
- All involved variables can be changed in the loop body.
- The expressions are evaluated in the order stated previously. Although it can create havoc, it is legal to branch into a C `for` loop body.

***Each of the Expressions Can Comprise Multiple Expressions***

Which in turn allow multiple loop variables that can be of any type.

- When multiple expressions are used in a single expression of a `for` statement, they are separated by commas (`,`).
- All C statements have values, and this form of multiple expression is no exception.
- The value of such a multiple expression is the value of the last component.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following `for` statement:

```c
for (count1 = 0, count2 = 1.0;
    count1 <= 10 && count2 <= 100.0;
    sum = ++count1 + count2, count2 *= 2.5);
```

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{The Operational Semantics Description of This Example}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state $\hspace{2em}$ count1 = 0
\state $\hspace{2em}$ count2 = 1.0
\state loop:
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} count1 > 10 \textbf{goto} out
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} count2 > 100.0 \textbf{goto} out
\state $\hspace{2em}$ count1 = count1 + 1
\state $\hspace{2em}$ sum = count1 + count2
\state $\hspace{2em}$ count2 = count2 * 2.5
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} loop
\state out: ...

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The example C `for` statement does not need and thus does not have a loop body. All the desired actions are part of the `for` statement itself, rather than in its body.

The first and third expressions are multiple statements. In both of these cases, the whole expression is evaluated, but the resulting value is not used in the loop control.

</div>

***C89 vs. C99+ and C++***

The `for` statement of C99 and C++ differs from that of earlier versions of C in two ways.

- First, in addition to an arithmetic expression, it can use a Boolean expression for loop control.
- Second, the first expression can include variable definitions.

<div class="alert-example">

```c
for (int count = 0; count < len; count++) { ... }
```

The scope of a variable defined in the `for` statement is from its definition to the end of the loop body.

</div>

***`for` in Other C-Based Languages***

The `for` statement of Java and C# is like that of C++, except that the loop control expression is restricted to `boolean`.

In all of the C-based languages,

- the last two loop parameters are evaluated with every iteration.
- Furthermore, variables that appear in the loop parameter expression can be changed in the loop body.
- Therefore, these loops can be complex and potentially unreliable.

### The for Statement of Python

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{The General Form of Python’s for}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{for} loop\_variable \textbf{in} object \textbf{:}
\state $\hspace{2em}$ - loop body
\state [\textbf{else} \textbf{:}
\state $\hspace{2em}$ - else clause]

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

- The loop variable is assigned the value in the object, which is often a range, one for each execution of the loop body.
    - After loop termination, the loop variable has the value last assigned to it.
    - The loop variable can be changed in the loop body, but such a change has no effect on loop operation.
- The $\textbf{else}$ clause, when present, is executed if the loop terminates normally.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following example:

```python
for count in [2, 4, 6]:
    print count
```

produces

```text
2
4
6
```

</div>

***Python's `range` Function***

For most simple counting loops in Python, the `range` function is used. `range` takes one, two, or three parameters. The following examples demonstrate the actions of `range`:

```python
range(5)        # returns [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
range(2, 7)     # returns [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
range(0, 8, 2)  # returns [0, 2, 4, 6]
```

Note that `range` never returns the highest value in a given parameter range.

### Counter-Controlled Loops in Functional Languages

Counter-controlled loops in imperative languages use a counter variable, but such variables do not exist in pure functional languages.

- Rather than iteration to control repetition, functional languages use *recursion*.
- Rather than a statement, functional languages use a recursive function.

Counting loops can be simulated in functional languages as follows:

- The counter can be a parameter for a function that repeatedly executes the loop body, which can be specified in a second function sent to the loop function as a parameter.
- So, such a loop function takes the body function and the number of repetitions as parameters.

<div class="alert-example">

The general form of an F# function for simulating counting loops, named `forLoop` in this case, is as follows:

```fsharp
let rec forLoop loopBody reps =
    if reps <= 0 then
        ()
    else
        loopBody()
        forLoop loopBody, (reps - 1);;
```

- The empty parentheses do nothing; they are there because in F# an empty statement is illegal.
- Every `if` must have an $\textbf{else}$ clause.

In this function,

- the parameter `loopBody` is the function with the body of the loop.
- the parameter `reps` is the number of repetitions.

The reserved word `rec` appears before the name of the function to indicate that it is recursive.

</div>

## Logically Controlled Loop

In many cases, collections of statements must be repeatedly executed, but the repetition control is based on a Boolean expression rather than a counter. For these situations, a logically controlled loop is convenient.

Actually, logically controlled loops are more general than counter-controlled loops.

- Every counting loop can be built with a logical loop, but the reverse is not true.
- Also, recall that only selection and logical loops are essential to express the control structure of any flowchart.

***Logical Loop in C-Based Languages***

The C-based programming languages include both pretest and posttest logically controlled loops that are not special forms of their counter-controlled iterative statements.

***while Loop***

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Pretest Logical Loop (while Loop)}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{while} (control\_expression)
\state $\hspace{2em}$ loop body

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Operational Semantics Descriptions of while Statement}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state loop:
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} control\_expression is false \textbf{goto} out
\state $\hspace{2em}$ [loop body]
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{goto} loop
\state out: ...

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

***do-while Loop***

Posttest loops are infrequently useful and also can be somewhat dangerous, in the sense that programmers sometimes forget that the loop body will always <mark>be executed at least once.</mark>

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Posttest Logical Loop (do-while Loop)}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{do}
\state $\hspace{2em}$ loop body
\state \textbf{while} (control\_expression);

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Operational Semantics Descriptions of do-while Statement}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state loop:
\state $\hspace{2em}$ [loop body]
\state $\hspace{2em}$ \textbf{if} control\_expression is true \textbf{goto} loop

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

<div class="alert-example">

These two statement forms are exemplified by the following C# code segments:

```csharp
sum = 0;
indat = Int32.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
while (indat >= 0) {
    sum += indat;
    indat = Int32.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
}
```

```csharp
value = Int32.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
do {
    value /= 10;
    digits ++;
} while (value > 0);
```

- Note that all variables in these examples are integer type.
- The `ReadLine` method of the `Console` object gets a line of text from the keyboard.
- `Int32.Parse` finds the number in its string parameter, converts it to int type, and returns it.

In both cases, the statement can be compound.

- In the pretest version of a logical loop (`while`), the statement or statement segment is executed as long as the expression evaluates to true.
- In the posttest version (`do`), the loop body is executed until the expression evaluates to false.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

!> 不確定例子是否符合文意。

It is legal in both C and C++ to branch into both `while` and `do` loop bodies.

```c
int i = 0;
goto inside; // 在迴圈開始執行前，透過 goto 跳到迴圈內
while (i < 5) {
    inside:
    printf("i = %d\n", i);
    i++;
}
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- The C89 version uses an arithmetic expression for control;
- in C99 and C++, it may be either arithmetic or Boolean.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Java,

- `while` and `do` statements are similar to those of C and C++, except the control expression must be `boolean` type.
- Because Java does not have a goto, the loop bodies cannot be entered anywhere except at their beginnings.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

?> A pretest logical loop can be simulated in a purely functional form with a recursive function.

Following is the general form of a simulated logical pretest loop, written in F#:

```fsharp
let rec whileLoop test body =
    if test() then
        body()
        whileLoop test body
    else
        ();;
```

</div>

## User-Located Loop Control Mechanisms

In some situations, it is convenient for a programmer to choose a location for loop control other than the top or bottom of the loop body. As a result, some languages provide this capability.

***`break` and `last`***

- C, C++, Python, Ruby, and C# have unconditional unlabeled exits (`break`).
- Java and Perl have unconditional labeled exits (`break` in Java, `last` in Perl).

<div class="alert-example">

Following is an example of nested loops in Java, in which there is a break out of the outer loop from the nested loop:

```java
outerLoop:
    for (row = 0; row < numRows; row++)
        for (col = 0; col < numCols; col++) {
            sum += mat[row][col];
            if (sum > 1000.0)
                break outerLoop;
        }
```

</div>

***`continue`***

C, C++, and Python include an unlabeled control statement, `continue`, that transfers control to the control mechanism of the smallest enclosing loop. This is not an exit but rather a way to <mark>skip the rest of the loop statements on the current iteration without terminating the loop construct.</mark>

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following:

```c
while (sum < 1000) {
    getnext(value);
    if (value < 0) continue;
    sum += value;
}
```

A negative value causes the assignment statement to be skipped, and control is transferred instead to the conditional at the top of the loop.

On the other hand, in

```c
while (sum < 1000) {
    getnext(value);
    if (value < 0) break;
    sum += value;
}
```

a negative value terminates the loop.

</div>

***Readability***

Both `last` and `break` provide for multiple exits from loops, which may seem to be somewhat of a hindrance to readability.

- However, unusual conditions that require loop termination are so common that such a statement is justified.
- Furthermore, readability is not seriously harmed, because the target of all such loop exits is the first statement after the loop (or an enclosing loop) rather than just anywhere in the program.
- Finally, the alternative of using multiple breaks to leave more than one level of loops is even more detrimental to readability.

***`break` and `last` vs. `goto`***

The motivation for user-located loop exits is simple: They fulfill a common need for goto statements using a highly restricted branch statement.

- The target of a goto can be many places in the program, both above and below the goto itself.
- However, the targets of user-located loop exits must be below the exit and can only follow immediately at the end of a compound statement.

## Iteration Based on Data Structures

A general data-based iteration statement uses a user-defined data structure and a user-defined function (the *iterator*) to go through the structure’s elements.

- The iterator is called at the beginning of each iteration, and
- each time it is called, the iterator returns an element from a particular data structure in some specific order.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose a program has a user-defined binary tree of data nodes, and the data in each node must be processed in some particular order.

- A user-defined iteration statement for the tree would successively set the loop variable to point to the nodes in the tree, one for each iteration.
- The initial execution of the user-defined iteration statement needs to issue a special call to the iterator to get the first tree element.
- The iterator must always remember which node it presented last so that it visits all nodes without visiting any node more than once. So an iterator must be history sensitive.
- A user-defined iteration statement terminates when the iterator fails to find more elements.

The `for` statement of the C-based languages, because of its great flexibility, can be used to simulate a user-defined iteration statement.

Once again, suppose the nodes of a binary tree are to be processed. If

- the tree root is pointed to by a variable named `root`.
- `traverse` is a function that sets its parameter to point to the next element of a tree in the desired order.

Te following could be used:

```c
// 原文「ptr == null」應該是錯的
for (ptr = root; ptr != null; ptr = traverse(ptr)) {
    ...
}
```

In this statement, `traverse` is the iterator.

</div>

***In OOP***

User-defined iteration statements are more important in object-oriented programming than they were in earlier software development paradigms, because users of object-oriented programming routinely use abstract data types for data structures, especially collections.

In such cases, a user-defined iteration statement and its iterator must be provided by the author of the data abstraction because the representation of the objects of the type is not known to the user.

<div class="alert-example">

An enhanced version of the `for` statement was added to Java in Java 5.0.

This statement simplifies iterating through the values in an array or objects in a collection that implements the `Iterable` interface. (All of the predefined generic collections in Java implement `Iterable`.)

For example, if we had an `ArrayList` collection named `myList` of strings, the following statement would iterate through all of its elements, setting each to `myElement`:

```java
for (String myElement : myList) { ... }
```

This new statement is referred to as “*foreach*”, although its reserved word is `for`.

</div>

***In .NET languages***

<div class="alert-example">

C# and F# (and the other .NET languages) also have generic library classes for collections.

For example, there are generic collection classes for lists, which are dynamic length arrays, stacks, queues, and dictionaries (hash table).

- All of these predefined generic collections have built-in iterators that are used implicitly with the `foreach` statement.
- Furthermore, users can define their own collections and write their own iterators, which can implement the `IEnumerator` interface, which enables the use of `foreach` on these collections.

Consider the following C# code:

```csharp
List<String> names = new List<String>();
names.Add("Bob");
names.Add("Carol");
names.Add("Alice");
...
foreach (String name in names)
    Console.WriteLine(name);
```

</div>

***In Ruby***

In Ruby, a `block` is a sequence of code, delimited by either braces (`{}`) or the `do` and `end` reserved words.

- Blocks can be used with specially written methods to create many useful constructs, including iterators for data structures.
- This construct consists of a method call followed by a block.
- A block is actually an anonymous method that is sent to the method (whose call precedes it) as a parameter.
- The called method can then call the block, which can produce output or objects.

Ruby predefines several iterator methods, such as `times` and `upto` for counter-controlled loops, and `each` for simple iterations of arrays and hashes.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following example of using `times`:

```ruby
>> 4.times {puts "Hey!"}
Hey!
Hey!
Hey!
Hey!
=> 4
```

- `>>` is the prompt of the interactive Ruby interpreter.
- `=>` is used to indicate the return value of the expression.
- The Ruby `puts` statement displays its parameter.

In this example,

- the `times` method is sent to the object 4, with the block sent along as a parameter.
- The `times` method calls the block four times, producing the four lines of output.
- The destination object, 4, is the return value from `times`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The most common Ruby iterator is `each`, which is often used to go through arrays and apply a block to each element.

For this purpose, it is convenient to allow blocks to have parameters, which, if present, appear at the beginning of the block, delimited by vertical bars (`|`).

The following example, which uses a block parameter, illustrates the use of `each`:

```ruby
>> list = [2, 4, 6, 8]
=> [2, 4, 6, 8]
>> list.each {|value| puts value}
2
4
6
8
=> [2, 4, 6, 8]
```

In this example,

- the block is called for each element of the array to which the `each` method is sent.
- The block produces the output, which is a list of the array’s elements.
- The return value of `each` is the array to which it is sent.

</div>

Instead of a counting loop, Ruby has the `upto` method.

<div class="alert-example">

We could have the following:

```ruby
1.upto(5) {|x| print x, " "}
```

This produces the following output:

```text
1 2 3 4 5
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Syntax that resembles a `for` loop in other languages could also be used, as in the following:

```ruby
for x in 1..5
    print x, " "
end
```

Ruby actually has no for statement—constructs like the above are converted by Ruby into `upto` method calls.

</div>

Now we consider how blocks work.

The `yield` statement

- is similar to a method call, except that there is no receiver object.
- The call is a request to execute the block attached to the method call, rather than a call to a method.
- `yield` is only called in a method that has been called with a block. If the block has parameters, they are specified in parentheses in the `yield` statement.
- The value returned by a block is that of the last expression evaluated in the block.

It is this process that is used to implement the built-in iterators, such as `times`.

***In Python***

Python provides strong support for iteration.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose

- One needs to process the nodes in some user-defined data structure.
- The structure has a traversal method that goes through the nodes of the structure in the desired order.

The following skeletal class definition includes such a traversal method that produces the nodes of an instance of this class, one at a time.

```python
class MyStructure:
    # Other method definitions, including a constructor

    def traverse(self):
        # if there is another node:
        #     set nod to next node
        # else:
        #     return
        yield nod
```

The `traverse` method appears to be a regular Python method, but it contains a `yield` statement, which dramatically changes the semantics of the method. In effect, the method is run in a separate thread of control.

- The `yield` statement acts like a return. On the first call to `traverse`, `yield` returns the initial node of the structure.
- However, on the second call, it returns the second node.
- On all but the first call to `traverse`, it begins its execution where it left off on the previous execution. Instead of restarting at its beginning, it is resumed.

Any local storage in such a method is maintained across its calls. In the case of `traverse`, subsequent calls begin their execution at the beginning of its code, but in the state that it was in its previous execution.

</div>

In Python, any method that contains a `yield` statement is called a *generator*, because it generates data one element at a time.

Of course, one could also produce all of the nodes of the structure, store them in an array, and process them from the array. However, the number of nodes could be large, requiring a large array to store them.

The approach using the iterator is more elegant and is not affected by the size of the data structure.

?> 使用 `yield` 逐一產生節點，避免大量使用記憶體（例如，將全部節點儲存於陣列中，再行處理）。
