# Unconditional Branching

An **unconditional branch** statement transfers execution control to a specified location in the program.

The unconditional branch, or `goto`, is the most powerful statement for controlling the flow of execution of a program’s statements. However, careless use of the goto can lead to serious problems.

- The goto has stunning power and great flexibility (all other control structures can be built with goto and a selector), but it is this power that makes its use dangerous.
- Without usage restrictions, imposed by either language design or programming standards, goto statements can make programs very difficult to read, and as a result, highly unreliable and costly to maintain.

<div class="alert-example">

A few languages have been designed without a goto—for example, Java, Python, and Ruby.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

However, most currently popular languages include a goto statement. The languages that have eliminated the goto have provided additional control statements, usually in the form of loop exits, to code one of the justifiable applications of the goto.

- The relatively new language, C#, includes a goto, even though one of the languages on which it is based, Java, does not. One legitimate use of C#’s goto is in the switch statement, as discussed in Section 8-2.

</div>

***`break` and `last`***

All of the loop exit statements discussed in Section 8-3 are actually camouflaged goto statements.

- They are, however, severely restricted gotos and are not harmful to readability.
- In fact, it can be argued that they improve readability, because to avoid their use results in convoluted and unnatural code that would be much more difficult to understand.
