# Guarded Commands

Quite different forms of selection and loop structures were suggested by Dijkstra.

- His primary motivation was to provide control statements that would support a program design methodology that ensured correctness during development rather than when verifying or testing completed programs.
- Another motivation is the increased clarity in reasoning that is possible with guarded commands. Simply put, a selectable segment of a selection statement in a guarded-command statement can be considered independently of any other part of the statement, which is not true for the selection statements of the common programming languages.

Guarded commands are covered in this chapter

- Because they are the basis for the linguistic mechanism developed later for concurrent programming in CSP.
- Guarded commands are also used to define functions in Haskell, as discussed in Chapter 15.

***Rationale***

Dijkstra’s guarded command control statements are interesting, in part because they illustrate how the syntax and semantics of statements can have an impact on program verification and vice versa.

Connection between control statements and program verification is intimate.

- Program verification is virtually impossible when goto statements are used.
- Verification is greatly simplified if
    1. only logical loops and selections are used or
    2. only guarded commands are used.

## Selection Guarded Command

***Form***

Dijkstra’s selection statement has the form

```GCL
if <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
[] <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
[] ...
[] <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
fi
```

The closing reserved word, `fi`, is the opening reserved word spelled backward.

The small blocks (`[]`), called *fatbars*, are used to separate the guarded clauses and allow the clauses to be statement sequences.

Each line in the selection statement, consisting of a Boolean expression (a guard) and a statement or statement sequence, is called a **guarded command**.

***Semantics***

When construct is reached,

- Evaluate all Boolean expressions.
- If more than one are true, choose one non-deterministically.
- If none are true, it is a runtime error.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following example:

```GCL
if i = 0 -> sum := sum + i
[] i > j -> sum := sum + j
[] j > i -> sum := sum + k
fi
```

- If `i = 0` and `j > i`, this statement chooses nondeterministically between the first and third assignment statements.
- If `i` is equal to `j` and is not zero, a runtime error occurs because none of the conditions are true.

</div>

This statement can be an elegant way of allowing the programmer to state that the order of execution, in some cases, is irrelevant.

<div class="alert-example">

To find the largest of two numbers, we can use

```GCL
if x >= y -> max := x
[] y >= x -> max := y
fi
```

This computes the desired result without overspecifying the solution. In particular, if `x` and `y` are equal, it does not matter which we assign to `max`. This is a form of abstraction provided by the nondeterministic semantics of the statement.

Now, consider this same process coded in a traditional programming language
selector:

```c
if (x >= y)
    max = x;
else
    max = y;
```

This could also be coded as follows:

```c
if (x > y)
    max = x;
else
    max = y;
```

There is no practical difference between these two statements.

- The first assigns `x` to `max` when `x` and `y` are equal; the second assigns `y` to `max` in the same circumstance.
- This choice between the two statements complicates the formal analysis of the code and the correctness proof of it. This is one of the reasons why guarded commands were developed by Dijkstra.

</div>

## Loop Guarded Command

***Form***

The loop structure proposed by Dijkstra has the form

```GCL
do <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
[] <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
[] ...
[] <Boolean expression> -> <statement>
od
```

***Semantics***

For each iteration

- Evaluate all Boolean expressions
- If more than one are true, choose one non-deterministically; then start loop again
- If none are true, exit loop

<div class="alert-example">

Given four integer variables, `q1`, `q2`, `q3`, and `q4`, rearrange the values of the four so that `q1 <= q2 <= q3 <= q4`.

Without guarded commands,

- one straightforward solution is to put the four values into an array, sort the array, and then assign the values from the array back into the scalar variables `q1`, `q2`, `q3`, and `q4`.
- While this solution is not difficult, it requires a good deal of code, especially if the sort process must be included.

Now, consider the following code, which uses guarded commands to solve the same problem but in a more concise and elegant way.

```GCL
do q1 > q2 -> temp := q1; q1 := q2; q2 := temp;
[] q2 > q3 -> temp := q2; q2 := q3; q3 := temp;
[] q3 > q4 -> temp := q3; q3 := q4; q4 := temp;
od
```

</div>
