# Introduction

***Imperative Programming Languages***

Imperative programming languages are, to varying degrees, abstractions of the underlying *von Neumann computer architecture*. The architecture’s two primary components are its

- Memory: Which stores both instructions and data.
- Processor: Which provides operations for modifying the contents of the memory.

The abstractions in a language for the memory cells of the machine are **variables**.

- In some cases, the characteristics of the abstractions are very close to the characteristics of the cells; an example of this is an integer variable, which is usually represented directly in one or more bytes of memory.
- In other cases, the abstractions are far removed from the organization of the hardware memory, as with a three-dimensional array, which requires a software mapping function to support the abstraction.
- A variable can be characterized by a collection of properties, or attributes, the most important of which is *type*, a fundamental concept in programming languages.
- Designing the data types of a language requires that a variety of issues be considered. (Data types are discussed in Chapter 6.)
- Among the most important of these issues are the *scope* and *lifetime* of variables.

***Functional Programming Languages***

Functional programming languages allow expressions to be named.

- These named expressions appear like assignments to variable names in imperative languages, but are fundamentally different in that they cannot be changed. So, they are like the named constants of the imperative languages.
- Pure functional languages do not have variables that are like those of the imperative languages. However, many functional languages do include such variables.
