# Names

Before beginning our discussion of variables, the design of one of the fundamental
attributes of variables, names, must be covered. Names are also associated
with subprograms, formal parameters, and other program constructs. The
term identifier is often used interchangeably with *name*.

## Name Forms

A name is a string of characters used to identify some entity in a program.

<div class="alert-example">

- C99 has no length limitation on its internal names, but only the first 63 are *significant*.
- *External names* in C99 (those defined outside functions, which must be handled by the linker) are restricted to 31 characters.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- Names in Java and C# have no length limit, and all characters in them are significant.
- C++ does not specify a length limit on names, although implementors sometimes do.

</div>

Names in most programming languages have the same form:

A letter followed by a string consisting of

- letters
- digits
- underscore (`_`)

<div class="alert-example">

?> Programming style issue (not a language design issue)

Although the use of underscore characters to form names was widely used in the 1970s and 1980s, that practice is now far less popular.

In the C-based languages, it has to a large extent been replaced by the so-called *camel notation*, in which all of the words of a multiple-word name except the first are capitalized, as in `myStack`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- All variable names in PHP must begin with a dollar sign (`$`).
- In Perl, the special character at the beginning of a variable’s name, `$`, `@`, or `%`, specifies its type (although in a different sense than in other languages).
- In Ruby, special characters at the beginning of a variable’s name, `@` or `@@`, indicate that the variable is an instance or a class variable, respectively.

</div>

In many languages, notably the C-based languages, uppercase and lowercase letters in names are distinct; that is, names in these languages are **case sensitive**.

<div class="alert-example">

The following three names are distinct in C++: `rose`, `ROSE`, and `Rose`.

?> Causes readability issues.

To some people, this is a serious detriment to readability, because names that look very similar in fact denote different entities.

- In that sense, case sensitivity violates the design principle that language constructs that look similar should have similar meanings.
- But in languages whose variable names are case-sensitive, although `Rose` and `rose` look similar, there is no connection between them.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Java and C#, many of the predefined names include both uppercase and lowercase letters.

For example, the Java method for converting a string to an integer value is `parseInt()`, and spellings such as `ParseInt()` and `parseint()` are not recognized.

?> Causes writability issues.

The need to remember specific case usage makes it more difficult to write correct programs. It is a kind of intolerance on the part of the language designer, which is enforced by the compiler.

</div>

## Special Words

Special words in programming languages are used to

- Make programs more readable by naming actions to be performed.
- Separate the syntactic parts of statements and programs.

A **reserved word** is a special word of a programming language that cannot be used as a name.

- In most languages, special words are classified as *reserved words*, which means they can*not be redefined* by programmers.
- But in some, such as Fortran, they are only **keywords**, which means they *can be redefined*.

<div class="alert-attention">

There is one potential problem with reserved words:

If the language includes a large number of reserved words, the user may have difficulty making up names that are not reserved.

The best example of this is COBOL, which has 300 reserved words. Unfortunately, some of the most commonly chosen names by programmers are in the list of reserved words—for example, `LENGTH`, `BOTTOM`, `DESTINATION`, and `COUNT`.

</div>

In most languages, names that are defined in other program units, such as Java packages and C and C++ libraries, can be made visible to a program.

- These names are predefined, but visible only if explicitly imported.
- Once imported, they cannot be redefined.
