# Variables

A program variable is an abstraction of a computer memory cell or collection of cells. Programmers often think of variables as names for memory locations, but there is much more to a variable than just a name.

From machine languages to assembly languages:

- <mark>Replacing</mark> absolute numeric memory <mark>addresses</mark> for data <mark>with names</mark>, making programs far more readable.
- The assembly language translator converted the names to actual addresses and also chose those addresses.

A variable can be characterized as a sextuple of attributes:

- **Name** ( [5-2][], [5-4 &sect; Explicit Heap-Dynamic Variables][] )
- **Address**
- **Value**
- **Type**
- **Lifetime** ( [5-4 &sect; Storage Bindings and Lifetime][] )
- **Scope** ( [5-5][] )

[5-2]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch05/5-2
[5-4 &sect; Explicit Heap-Dynamic Variables]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch05/5-4?id=explicit-heap-dynamic-variables
[5-4 &sect; Storage Bindings and Lifetime]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch05/5-4?id=storage-bindings-and-lifetime
[5-5]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch05/5-5

## Address

The **address** of a variable is the machine memory address with which it is associated.

It is possible for the same variable to be associated with different addresses at different times during the execution of the program.

<div class="alert-example">

If a subprogram has a local variable that is allocated from the run-time stack when the subprogram is called, different calls may result in that variable having different addresses. These are in a sense different instantiations of the same variable.

- [5-4 &sect; Storage Bindings and Lifetime][]: The process of associating variables with addresses.
- [10-1][]: An implementation model for subprograms and their activations.

[10-1]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch10/10-1

</div>

### L-value

*The address of a variable* is sometimes called its **l-value**, because the address is what is required when the name of a variable appears in the left side of an assignment.

### Aliases

It is possible to have multiple variables that have the same address. When more than one variable name can be used to access the *same memory location*, the variables are called **aliases**.

<div class="alert-attention">

Aliasing is a hindrance to readability because it allows a variable to have its value changed by an assignment to a different variable.

If variables named `total` and `sum` are aliases, any change to the value of `total` also changes the value of `sum` and vice versa.

- A reader of the program must always remember that `total` and `sum` are different names for the same memory cell.
- Because there can be any number of aliases in a program, this can be very difficult in practice. Aliasing also makes program verification more difficult.

</div>

Aliases can be created in programs in several different ways.

<div class="alert-example">

One common way in C and C++ is with their **union** types. Unions are discussed at length in Chapter 6.

</div>

Aliasing is simply a side effect of the nature of *pointers* and *references*.

- Two pointer variables are aliases when they point to the same memory location.
- The same is true for reference variables.

<div class="alert-example">

When a C++ pointer is set to point at a named variable, the pointer, when *dereferenced*, and the variable’s name are aliases.

</div>

Aliasing can be created in many languages through subprogram parameters. These kinds of aliases are discussed in Chapter 9.

## Type

The **type** of a variable determines

- The *range* of values the variable can store.
- The set of *operations* that are defined for values of the type.

<div class="alert-example">

The `int` type in Java specifies

- A value range of -2147483648 to 2147483647.
- Arithmetic operations for addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and modulus.

</div>

## Value

The **value** of a variable is the contents of the memory cell or cells associated with the variable.

<div class="alert-note">

It is convenient to think of computer memory in terms of abstract cells, rather than physical cells.

- The physical cells, or individually addressable units, of most contemporary computer memories are eight-bit units called **bytes**.
- A byte size is *too small* for most program variables.
- An *abstract* memory cell has the size required by the variable with which it is associated.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Although floating-point values may occupy four physical bytes in a particular implementation of a particular language, a floating-point value is thought of as occupying a single abstract memory cell.

</div>

The value of each simple nonstructured type is considered to occupy a single abstract cell. Henceforth, the term **memory cell** will mean *abstract* memory cell.

### R-value

A *variable’s value* is sometimes called its **r-value** because it is what is required when the name of the variable appears in the right side of an assignment statement.

To access the *r*-value, the *l*-value must be determined first.

- Such determinations are not always simple.
- For example, scoping rules can greatly complicate matters.
