# The Concept of Binding

A **binding** is an association between an attribute and an entity, such as

- Between a variable and its type or value.
- Between an operation and a symbol.

The time at which a binding takes place is called **binding time**.

- Binding and binding times are prominent concepts in the semantics of programming languages.
- Bindings can take place at language design time, language implementation time, compile time, load time, link time, or run time.

<div class="alert-example">

The asterisk symbol (`*`) is usually bound to the multiplication operation at language design time.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

A data type, such as `int` in C, is bound to a range of possible values at language implementation time.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

At compile time, a variable in a Java program is bound to a particular data type.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

- A variable may be bound to a storage cell when the program is loaded into memory.
- That same binding does not happen until run time in some cases, as with variables declared in Java methods.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

A call to a library subprogram is bound to the subprogram code at link time.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following C++ assignment statement:

```c
count = count + 5;
```

Some of the bindings and their binding times for the parts of this assignment statement are as follows:

- The type of `count` is bound at compile time.
- The set of possible values of `count` is bound at compiler design time.
- The meaning of the operator symbol `+` is bound at compile time, when the types of its operands have been determined.
- The internal representation of the literal `5` is bound at compiler design time.
- The value of `count` is bound at execution time with this statement.

</div>

A complete understanding of the binding times for the attributes of program entities is a prerequisite for understanding the semantics of a programming language. For example,

- To understand what a subprogram does, one must understand how the actual parameters in a call are bound to the formal parameters in its definition.
- To determine the current value of a variable, it may be necessary to know when the variable was bound to storage and with which statement(s).

## Binding of Attributes to Variables

The essential point is to distinguish between static and dynamic bindings.

- **Static** binding:

    - If the binding first occurs *before run time* begins and
    - Remains *unchanged* throughout program execution.

    ?> 變數的屬性（例如：型別、記憶體位置…等）在編譯時期就已經確定，且不會在執行期間改變。

- **Dynamic** binding:

    - If the binding first occurs *during run time* or
    - It *can change* in the course of program execution.

## Type Bindings

Before a variable can be referenced in a program, it must be bound to a data type. The two important aspects of this binding are

- How the type is specified?
- When the binding takes place?
- If *static*, the type may be specified by either an *explicit* or an *implicit declaration*.

### Static Type Binding

*Most* widely used programming languages that use **static type binding** exclusively *require explicit declarations* of all variables.

***Explicit Declaration***

Types can be specified statically through some form of explicit or implicit declaration.

- An **explicit declaration** is a statement in a program that lists variable names and *specifies* that they are a particular type.

***Implicit Declaration***

- An **implicit declaration** is a means of associating variables with types through *default conventions*, rather than declaration statements.

    In this case, the first appearance of a variable name in a program constitutes its implicit declaration.

    - Advantage: writability (a minor convenience)
    - Disadvantage: reliability (less trouble with Perl)

  <div class="alert-example">

  ?> Some of the problems with implicit declarations can be avoided by requiring names for specific types to begin with particular special characters.
  
  In Perl
  
    - Any name that begins with `$` is a scalar, which can store either a string or a numeric value.
    - If a name begins with `@`, it is an array.
    - If it begins with a `%`, it is a hash structure.
  
  This creates different namespaces for different type variables. In this scenario,
  
    - The names `@apple` and `%apple` are unrelated, because each is from a different namespace.
    - Furthermore, a program reader always knows the type of a variable when reading its name.
  
  </div>

- Both explicit and implicit declarations create *static bindings* to types.

**Implicit variable type binding** is done by the language processor, either a compiler or an interpreter.

- The simplest of these is naming conventions.
- In this case, the compiler or interpreter binds a variable to a type based on the syntactic form of the variable’s name.

Another kind of *implicit type declarations* uses context. This is sometimes called **type inference**.

?> 也就是 Type inference 可以作為實現 Implicit variable type binding 的一種方法。

<div class="alert-example">

In the simpler case, the context is the type of the value assigned to the variable in a declaration statement.

For example, in C# a `var` declaration of a variable must include an initial value, whose type is taken as the type of the variable. Consider the following declarations:

```csharp
var sum = 0;       // int
var total = 0.0;   // float
var name = "Fred"; // string
```

Keep in mind that these are *statically typed variables*—their types are fixed for the lifetime of the unit in which they are declared.

Visual Basic, Swift, and the functional languages ML, Haskell, OCaml, and F# also use type inferencing.

</div>

<div class="alert-warning">

Although they are a minor convenience to programmers, implicit declarations can be detrimental to reliability.

Implicit declarations prevent the compilation process from detecting some typographical and programmer errors.

</div>

### Dynamic Type Binding

- With **dynamic type binding**, the type of a variable is not specified by a declaration statement, nor can it be determined by the spelling of its name.
- Instead, <mark>the variable is bound to a type when it is assigned a value in an assignment statement.</mark>

When the assignment statement is executed,

- The variable being assigned is bound to the type of the value of the expression on the right side of the assignment.
- Such an assignment may also bind the variable to an address and a memory cell, because different type values may require different amounts of storage.
- Any variable can be assigned any type value.
- Furthermore, a variable’s type can change any number of times during program execution.

?> The type of a variable whose type is dynamically bound may be *temporary*.

- When the type of a variable is *statically* bound, the name of the variable can be thought of being bound to a type, in the sense that the type and name of a variable are simultaneously bound.
- However, when a variable’s type is *dynamically* bound, its name can be thought of as being only temporarily bound to a type.

The primary advantage of dynamic binding of variables to types is that it provides more programming *flexibility*.

<div class="alert-example">

Whatever type data is input will be acceptable, because the variables in which the data are to be stored can be bound to the correct type when the data is assigned to the variables after input.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Python, Ruby, JavaScript, and PHP, type binding is dynamic.

For example, a JavaScript script may contain the following statement:

```js
list = [10.2, 3.5]; // a single-dimensioned array of length 2
list = 47;          // a scalar variable
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The option of dynamic type binding was included in C# 2010. A variable can be declared to use dynamic type binding by including the `dynamic` reserved word in its declaration:

```csharp
dynamic any;
```

This is similar, although also different from declaring `any` to have type `object`.

- It is similar in that `any` can be assigned a value of any type, just as if it were declared `object`.
- It is different in that
    - `dynamic` is *not* useful for several different situations of interoperation; for example, with dynamically typed languages such as IronPython and IronRuby (.NET versions).
    - However, `dynamic` is useful when data of unknown type come into a program from an *external source*.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In pure object-oriented languages—for example, Ruby—

- All variables are references and do not have types.
- All data are objects and any variable can reference any object.

Variables in such languages are, in a sense, all the same type—they are references. However,

- Unlike the references in Java, which are restricted to referencing one specific type of value.
- Variables in Ruby can reference any object.

</div>

***Disadvantages***

- First, it causes programs to be *less reliable*, because the error-detection capability of the compiler is diminished relative to a compiler for a language with static type bindings.
- Dynamic type binding allows any variable to be assigned a value of any type.
    - Incorrect types of right sides of assignments are not detected as errors.
    - Rather, the type of the left side is simply *changed to the incorrect type*.

<div class="alert-attention">

Note that this disadvantage is also present to some extent in some languages that use *static type binding*, such as C and C++, which in many cases *automatically convert the type* of the RHS of an assignment to the type of the LHS.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

For example, suppose that in a particular JavaScript program,

- `i` and `x` are currently the names of *scalar numeric variables*.
- `y` is currently the name of an *array*.

Furthermore, suppose that the program needs the assignment statement

```js
i = x;
```

but because of a *keying error*, it has the assignment statement

```js
i = y;
```

In JavaScript (or any other language that uses dynamic type binding), no error is detected in this statement by the interpreter.

- The type of the variable named `i` is simply changed to an array.
- But later uses of `i` will expect it to be a scalar, and correct results will be impossible.

In a language with static type binding, such as Java, the compiler would detect the error in the assignment `i = y`, and the program would not get to execution.

</div>

Perhaps the greatest disadvantage of dynamic type binding is *cost*.

- The cost of implementing dynamic attribute binding is considerable, particularly in execution time.
- Type checking must be done at run time.
- Every variable must have a run-time descriptor associated with it to maintain the current type.
- The storage used for the value of a variable must be of varying size, because different type values require different amounts of storage.

***Efficiency***

Finally, languages that have dynamic type binding for variables are usually implemented using *pure interpreters* rather than compilers.

- Computers do not have instructions whose operand types are not known at compile time.
- Therefore, a compiler cannot build machine instructions for the expression `a + b` if the types of `a` and `b` are not known at compile time.

Pure interpretation typically takes at least 10 times as long as it does to execute equivalent machine code.

- Of course, if a language is implemented with a pure interpreter, the time to do dynamic type binding is hidden by the overall time of interpretation, so it seems less costly in that environment.
- On the other hand, languages with static type bindings are seldom implemented by pure interpretation, because programs in these languages can be easily translated to very efficient machine code versions.

## Storage Bindings and Lifetime

The fundamental character of an imperative programming language is in large part determined by the design of the storage bindings for its variables.

- The memory cell to which a variable is bound somehow must be taken from a pool of available memory. This process is called **allocation**.
- **Deallocation** is the process of placing a memory cell that has been unbound from a variable back into the pool of available memory.

The **lifetime** of a variable is the time during which the variable is bound to a specific memory location. So, the lifetime of a variable begins when it is bound to a specific cell and ends when it is unbound from that cell.

To investigate storage bindings of variables, it is convenient to separate scalar (unstructured) variables into four categories, according to their lifetimes. These categories are named

- **Static**
- **Stack-dynamic**
- **Explicit heap-dynamic**
- **Implicit heap-dynamic**

### Static Variables

<div class="alert-note">

A **static variable**

- Is bound to a memory cell before program execution begins.
- And remains bound to that same memory cell until program execution terminates.

</div>

Statically bound variables have several valuable applications in programming.

- *Globally accessible variables* are often used throughout the execution of a program, thus making it necessary to have them bound to the same storage during that execution.
- Sometimes it is convenient to have subprograms that are *history sensitive*. Such a subprogram must have *local static variables*.

<div class="alert-attention">

When the `static` modifier appears in the declaration of a variable in a class definition in C++, Java, and C#, it also implies that the variable is a *class variable*, rather than an *instance variable*.

Class variables are created statically some time before the class is first instantiated.

</div>

***Advantages***

One advantage of static variables is efficiency.

- All addressing of static variables can be direct.

    Also, no run-time overhead is incurred for allocation and deallocation of static variables, although this time is often negligible.

- Other kinds of variables often require indirect addressing, which is slower.

***Disadvantages***

- One disadvantage of static binding to storage is reduced flexibility; in particular, a language that has only static variables cannot support recursive subprograms.

- Another disadvantage is that storage cannot be shared among variables.

  <div class="alert-example">

  Suppose

    - A program has two subprograms, both of which require large arrays.
    - The two subprograms are never active at the same time.

  If the arrays are static, they cannot share the same storage.

  ```c
  void funcA() {
      static int A[1000];
  }
  
  void funcB() {
      static int B[1000];
  }
  
  int main() {
      funcA();
      funcB();
      return 0;
  }
  ```

  </div>

### Stack-Dynamic Variables

**Stack-dynamic variables** are those whose

- Storage bindings are created when their declaration statements are elaborated.
- Types are statically bound.

**Elaboration** of such a declaration refers to

- <mark>The storage allocation and binding process</mark> indicated by the declaration.
- Which takes place when execution reaches the code to which the declaration is attached.
- Therefore, elaboration occurs during *run time*.

<div class="alert-example">

- The variable declarations that appear at the beginning of a Java method are elaborated when the method is called.
- The variables defined by those declarations are deallocated when the method completes its execution.

```java
void function() {
    // `x` is stack-dynamic variable
    int x = 5; // Elaboration occurs here when the function is called

    ...

    // `x` is deallocated deallocated when the method completes its execution
}
```

</div>

Stack-dynamic variables are allocated from the *run-time stack*.

- Some languages—for example, C++ and Java—allow variable declarations to occur anywhere a statement can appear.

- In some implementations of these languages,

    - All of the stack-dynamic variables declared in a function or method (not including those declared in nested blocks) may be bound to storage at the beginning of execution of the function or method.

    - Even though the declarations of some of these variables do not appear at the beginning.

    - In such cases, the variable becomes visible at the declaration, but the storage binding (and initialization, if it is specified in the declaration) occurs when the function or method begins execution.

    - The fact that <mark>storage binding of a variable takes place before it becomes visible does not affect the semantics of the language.</mark>

  <div class="alert-example">

    ```c
    void function() {
        // Storage for `x` and `y` is allocated when the function starts
        
        int x = 5;  // `x` becomes visible and is initialized here
        
        // Some code that does not use `y` yet
        printf("Value of x: %d\n", x);
        
        int y = 10; // `y` becomes visible and is initialized here
        
        printf("Value of y: %d\n", y);
    }
    ```

    In Java, C++, and C#, variables defined in methods are by default stack dynamic.

  </div>

- All attributes, *other* than storage, such as type and range of value, *are statically bound* to stack-dynamic scalar variables (e.g. `int`, `float`, etc.).
- That is not the case for some structured types, as is discussed in Chapter 6.

***Implementation***

Implementation of allocation/deallocation processes for stack-dynamic variables is discussed in Chapter 10.

***Advantages***

- In most cases, recursive subprograms require some form of dynamic local storage so that each active copy of the recursive subprogram has its own version of the local variables. These needs are conveniently met by stack-dynamic variables.
- Even in the absence of recursion, having stack-dynamic local storage for subprograms is not without merit, because all subprograms share the same memory space for their locals.

***Disadvantages***

- Stack-dynamic variables are the run-time overhead of allocation and deallocation.
- Possibly slower accesses because indirect addressing is required.
- Subprograms cannot be history sensitive.

<div class="alert-attention">

The time required to allocate and deallocate stack-dynamic variables is not significant.

- All of the stack-dynamic variables that are declared at the beginning of a subprogram are allocated and deallocated *together*, rather than by separate operations.

?> 避免個別操作，通過一次性操作來減少時間負擔，提升效能。

</div>

### Explicit Heap-Dynamic Variables

**Explicit heap-dynamic variables** are nameless (abstract) memory cells that are <mark>allocated and deallocated by explicit run-time instructions</mark> written by the programmer.

These variables, which

- are allocated from and deallocated to the heap.

    The heap is a collection of storage cells whose organization is highly disorganized due to the unpredictability of its use.

- can only be referenced through *pointer* or *reference variables*.

    The pointer or reference variable that is used to access an explicit heap-dynamic variable is created as any other scalar variable.

An explicit heap-dynamic variable

- Bound to a type at compile time, so the type binding is static.
- Bound to storage at the time it is created, which is during run time.

An explicit heap-dynamic variable is created by either

- An operator (e.g. `new` in C++).
- A call to a system subprogram provided for that purpose (e.g. `malloc` in C).

<div class="alert-example">

In C++,

- The allocation operator, named `new`, uses a type name as its operand.
- When executed, an explicit heap-dynamic variable of the operand type is created and its address is returned.

In addition to a subprogram or operator for creating explicit heap-dynamic variables, some languages include a subprogram or operator for *explicitly destroying* them.

```cpp
int *intNode;       // Declare a pointer
intNode = new int;  // Use `new` to create a heap-dynamic variable
...
delete intNode;     // Deallocate the heap-dynamic variable pointed to by `intNode`
```

- An explicit heap-dynamic variable of int type is created by the `new` operator.
- This variable can then be referenced through the pointer, `intNode`.
- Later, the variable is deallocated by the `delete` operator.

C++ requires the *explicit deallocation operator* `delete`, because it does not use implicit storage reclamation, such as garbage collection.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Java,

- All data except the primitive scalars are objects.
- Objects are explicitly heap dynamic and are accessed through reference variables.

Java has no way of explicitly destroying a heap-dynamic variable; rather, *implicit garbage collection* is used. Garbage collection is discussed in Chapter 6.

```java
MyObject obj1 = new MyObject();

obj1 = new MyObject(); // 將 `obj1` 變數指向新的物件。舊的物件不再有任何參考，會被垃圾回收

MyObject obj2 = obj1; // `obj2` 也指向新的物件

// 當程式結束時，Java 會自動進行垃圾回收
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

C# has both explicit heap-dynamic and stack-dynamic objects, all of which are *implicitly deallocated*.

In addition, C# supports C++-style pointers.

- Such pointers are used to reference heap, stack, and even static variables and objects.
- These pointers have the same dangers as those of C++, and the objects they reference on the heap are *not* implicitly deallocated.
- Pointers are included in C# to allow C# components to interoperate with C and C++ components.

To discourage their use, and also to make clear to any program reader that the code uses pointers, the header of any method that defines a pointer must include the reserved word `unsafe`.

</div>

***Advantages***

Explicit heap-dynamic variables are often used to construct *dynamic structures*, such as linked lists and trees, that need to grow and/or shrink during execution. Such structures can be built conveniently using pointers or references and explicit heap-dynamic variables.

***Disadvantages***

The disadvantages of explicit heap-dynamic variables are the difficulty of

- Using pointer and reference variables correctly.
- The cost of references to the variables.
- The complexity of the required storage management implementation.

This is essentially the problem of heap management, which is costly and complicated.

Implementation methods for explicit heap-dynamic variables are discussed at length in Chapter 6.

### Implicit Heap-Dynamic Variables

**Implicit heap-dynamic variables** are bound to heap storage only when they are assigned values.

In fact, all their attributes are bound every time they are assigned.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following JavaScript assignment statement:

```js
highs = [74, 84, 86, 90, 71];
```

Regardless of whether the variable named `highs` was previously used in the program or what it was used for, it is now an array of five numeric values.

</div>

***Advantages***

The advantage of such variables is that they have the highest degree of flexibility, allowing highly generic code to be written.

***Disadvantages***

One disadvantage of implicit heap-dynamic variables is the run-time overhead of maintaining all the dynamic attributes, which could include array subscript types and ranges, among others.

Another disadvantage is the loss of some error detection by the compiler, as previously discussed.
