# Scope

The **scope** of a variable is the range of statements in which the variable is **visible**. A variable is visible in a statement if it can be referenced or assigned in that statement.

- **Local** variable isin a program unit or block if it is declared there.
- *Nonlocal* variables of a program unit or block are those that are visible within the program unit or block but are not declared there.
- *Global* variables are a special category of nonlocal variables, which are discussed in Section 5.5.4.

Scoping issues of classes, packages, and namespaces are discussed in Chapter 11.

## Static Scope

**Static scoping** is so named because <mark>the scope of a variable can be statically determined</mark>—that is, *prior to execution*. This permits a human program reader (and a compiler) to determine the type of every variable in the program simply by examining its source code.

There are two categories of static-scoped languages:

- Those in which subprograms can be nested, which creates nested static scopes.
- Those in which subprograms cannot be nested. In this category, static scopes are also created by subprograms but nested scopes are created only by nested class definitions and blocks.

?> In this section, we focuses on those languages that *allow* nested subprograms.

<div class="alert-example">

Ada, JavaScript, Common Lisp, Scheme, Fortran 2003+, F#, and Python allow nested subprograms.

```js
function outerFunction() {
    const x = 'outer';
    
    (function innerFunction() {
        const y = 'inner';
        console.log(x);
    })(); // Immediately Invoked Function Expression
    
    console.log(y); // ReferenceError: `y` is not defined
}
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The C-based languages do *not allow* nested subprograms.

```c
void function() {
    int x = 10; // local variable `x` in the function
    
    {
        int y = 20; // local variable `y` within this block
        printf("x: %d\n", x);
        printf("y: %d\n", y);
    }
    
    printf("y: %d\n", y); // error: `y` undeclared
}
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

<div class="alert-note">

When the reader of a program finds a reference to a variable, the attributes of the variable can be determined by finding the statement in which it is declared (either explicitly or implicitly).

In static-scoped languages with nested subprograms, this process can be thought of in the following way.

<div class="stepper">

- <div>

    Suppose a reference is made to a variable `x` in subprogram `sub1()`.

  </div>
- <div>

    The correct declaration is found by first searching the declarations of subprogram `sub1()`.

  </div>
- <div>

    If no declaration is found for the variable there, the search continues in the declarations of the subprogram that declared subprogram `sub1()`, which is called its **static parent**.

    (The static parent of subprogram `sub1()`, and its static parent, and so forth up to and including the largest enclosing subprogram, are called the **static ancestors** of `sub1()`.)

  </div>
- <div>

    If a declaration of `x` is not found there, the search continues to the next larger enclosing unit (the unit that declared `sub1()`’s parent), and so forth, until a declaration for `x` is found or the largest unit’s declarations have been searched without success.

    In that case, an undeclared variable error is reported.

  </div>

</div>

</div>

Actual implementation techniques for static scoping, which are discussed in Chapter 10, are usually much more efficient than the process just described.

Consider the following JavaScript function, `big()`, in which the two functions `sub1()` and `sub2()` are nested:

```js
function big() {
    function sub1() {
        var x = 7;
        sub2();
    }

    function sub2() {
        var y = x;
    }

    var x = 3;
    sub1();
}
```

- Under static scoping, the reference to the variable `x` in `sub2()` is to the `x` declared in the procedure `big()`.
- This is true because the search for `x` begins in the procedure in which the reference occurs, `sub2()`, but no declaration for `x` is found there.
- The search continues in the static parent of `sub2()`, `big()`, where the declaration of `x` is found. The `x` declared in `sub1()` is ignored, because it is not in the static ancestry of `sub2()`.

In some languages that use static scoping, regardless of whether nested subprograms are allowed, some variable declarations can *be hidden* from some other code segments. For example,

- The variable `x` is declared in both `big()` and in `sub1()`, which is nested inside `big()`.
- Within `sub1()`, every simple reference to `x` is to the local `x`.
- Therefore, the outer `x` is hidden from `sub1()`.

</div>

### Blocks

Many languages allow new static scopes to be defined in the midst of executable code. This powerful concept allows a section of code to have its own local variables whose scope is *minimized*.

Such variables are typically *stack dynamic*, so their storage is allocated when the section is entered and deallocated when the section is exited.

- Such a section of code is called a **block**.
- Blocks provide the origin of the phrase **block-structured language**.

<div class="alert-example">

The C-based languages allow any compound statement (a statement sequence surrounded by matched braces (`{}`)) to have declarations and thereby define a new scope. Such compound statements are called blocks.

For example, if `list` were an integer array, one could write the following:

```c
if (list[i] < list[j]) {
    int temp;
    temp = list[i];
    list[i] = list[j];
    list[j] = temp;
}
```

</div>

- The scopes created by blocks, which could be nested in larger blocks, are treated exactly like those created by subprograms.
- References to variables in a block that are not declared there are connected to declarations by searching enclosing scopes (blocks or subprograms) in order of increasing size.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following skeletal C function:

```c
void sub() {
    int count;
    ...
    while (...) {
        int count;
        count++;
        ...
    }
    ...
}
```

- The reference to `count` in the `while` loop is to that loop’s local `count`.
- In this case, the `count` of `sub()` *is hidden* from the code inside the `while` loop.

In general, a declaration for a variable effectively hides any declaration of a variable with the same name in a larger enclosing scope.

!> Note that this code is legal in C and C++ but illegal in Java and C#. The designers of Java and C# believed that the reuse of names in nested blocks was too error prone to be allowed.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Although JavaScript uses static scoping for its nested functions, nonfunction blocks cannot be defined in the language.

```js
(function outer() {
    (function inner() { // 除了函數，也可以是 if 或 loop 建立的區塊 (block)
        var x = 'x';    // `x` 宣告在 `inner()`，但作用域 (scope) 卻是整個 `outer()`
        const y = 'y';  // 可以使用 let 或 const，來建立區塊作用域變數

        //   var: function-scoped, globally-scoped
        //   let: block-scoped
        // const: block-scoped
    })();
    
    console.log(x);
    console.log(y); // ReferenceError: `y` is not defined
})();
```

</div>

#### Blocks in Functional Programming Languages

Most *functional programming languages* include a construct that is related to the blocks of the imperative languages, usually named **let**. These constructs have two parts,

1. The first of which is to bind names to values, usually specified as expressions.
2. The second part is an expression that uses the names defined in the first part.

- Programs in functional languages are comprised of expressions, rather than statements.
- Therefore, the final part of a `let` construct is an expression, rather than a statement.

<div class="alert-example">

In Scheme, a `let` construct is a call to the function `LET` with the following form:

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{A let Construct in Scheme}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state (LET (
\state $\hspace{2em}$ (name$_1$ expression$_1$)
\state $\hspace{2em}$ ...
\state $\hspace{2em}$ (name$_\text{n}$ expression$_\text{n}$))
\state $\hspace{2em}$ expression
\state )

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The semantics of the call to `LET` is as follows:

1. The first n expressions are evaluated and the values are assigned to the associated names.
2. Then, the *final expression* is evaluated and the *return value* of `LET` is that value.

This differs from a block in an imperative language in that the *names* are of *values*

- They are not variables in the imperative sense.
- Once set, they cannot be changed.

However, they are like local variables in a block in an imperative language in that their scope is local to the call to `LET`. Consider the following call to `LET`:

```scheme
(LET (
    (top (+ a b))
    (bottom (- c d)))
    (/ top bottom)
)
```

This call computes and returns the value of the expression `(a + b) / (c - d)`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In ML, the form of a `let` construct is as follows:

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{A let Construct in ML}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state let
\state $\hspace{2em}$ val name$_1$ = expression$_1$
\state $\hspace{2em}$ ...
\state $\hspace{2em}$ val name$_\text{n}$ = expression$_\text{n}$
\state in
\state $\hspace{2em}$ expression
\state end;

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

Each `val` statement binds a name to an expression. As with Scheme, the names in the first part are like the named constants of imperative languages; once set, they cannot be changed.

Consider the following `let` construct:

```Meta Language
let
    val top = a + b
    val bottom = c - d
in
    top / bottom
end;
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The general form of a `let` construct in F# is as follows:

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{A let Construct in F\#}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state let left\_side = expression

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The left_side of `let` can be a name or a tuple pattern (a sequence of names separated by commas).

- The scope of a name defined with `let` inside a function definition is <mark>from the end of the defining expression to the end of the function.</mark>
- The scope of `let` can be limited by *indenting* the following code, which creates a new local scope.

Consider the following code:

```fsharp
let n1 =
    let n2 = 7
    let n3 = n2 + 3
    n3;; // return value
let n4 = n3 + n1;; // `n3` is not defined
```

- The scope of `n1` extends over all of the code.
- However, the scope of `n2` and `n3` ends when the indentation ends.

So, the use of `n3` in the last `let` causes an error.

The last line of the `let n1` scope is the value bound to `n1`; it could be any expression.

</div>

### Declaration Order

- In C89, as well as in some other languages, all data declarations in a function except those in nested blocks must appear at the beginning of the function.
- However, some languages—for example, C99, C++, Java, JavaScript, and C#—allow variable declarations to appear anywhere a statement can appear in a program unit.

<div class="alert-example">

```c
void example() {
    int x = 10;

    printf("%d\n", x);

    // C89 does not allow variable declarations after any executable statements
    // In C99, however, variables can be declared anywhere in the block
    float y = 3.14;
}
```

</div>

Declarations may create scopes that are not associated with compound statements or subprograms.

<div class="alert-example">

In C99, C++, and Java, the scope of all local variables is from their declarations to the ends of the blocks in which those declarations appear.

```cpp
int main() {
    int x = 10; // Scope of `x` is from here to the end of `main()`

    {
        int y = 20; // Scope of `y` is only within this inner block

        // `x` and `y` can be used here
    }

    // `y` is out of scope here
    // Only `x` can be used here

    return 0;
}
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In the official documentation for C#,

- the *scope* of any variable declared in a block is said to be the *whole block*, regardless of the position of the declaration in the block, as long as it is not in a nested block. The same is true for methods.
- However, this is *misleading*, because the C# language definition requires that all variables be declared before they are used.

Therefore, although the scope of a variable is said to extend from the declaration to the top of the block or subprogram in which that declaration appears, <mark>the variable still cannot be used above its declaration.</mark>

---

Recall that C# does not allow the declaration of a variable in a nested block to have the same name as a variable in a nesting scope. This, together with the rule that the scope of a declaration is the whole block, makes the following nested declaration of `x` illegal:

```csharp
{
    {
        int x; // Illegal
        ...
    }
    int x;
}
```

Note that C# still requires that all be declared before they are used. Therefore,
although the scope of a variable extends from the declaration to the top
of the block or subprogram in which that declaration appears, the variable still
cannot be used above its declaration.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In JavaScript, local variables can be declared anywhere in a function, but the scope of such a variable is always the entire function. If used before its declaration in the function, such a variable has the value `undefined`. The reference is not illegal.

- The `var` statement declares *function-scoped* or *globally-scoped* variables.
- The `let` declaration declares re-assignable, *block-scoped* local variables.
- The `const` declaration declares *block-scoped* local variables.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The `for` statements of C++, Java, and C# allow variable definitions in their initialization expressions.

- In early versions of C++, the scope of such a variable was from its definition to the end of the smallest enclosing block.
- In the standard version, however, the scope is restricted to the `for` construct, as is the case with Java and C#.

Consider the following skeletal method:

```cpp
void fun() {
    ...
    for (int count = 0; count < 10; count++) { // Scope of `count` begins here
        ...
    } // Scope of `count` ends here
    ...
}
```

In later versions of C++, as well as in Java and C#, the scope of `count` is from the `for` statement to the end of its body (the right brace `}`).

</div>

### Global Scope

Some languages, including C, C++, PHP, JavaScript, and Python,

- Allow a program structure that is a sequence of function definitions, in which variable definitions can appear outside the functions.
- Definitions *outside* functions in a file create global variables, which potentially can be visible to those functions.

C and C++ have both declarations and definitions of global data.

- **Declarations** specify types and other attributes but do not cause allocation of storage.
- **Definitions** specify attributes *and* cause storage allocation.

Declaration order and global variables are also issues in the class and member declarations in object-oriented languages. These are discussed in Chapter 12.

<div class="alert-example">

<div class="alert-warning">

不確定例子是否符合作者表達的意思。

</div>

For a specific global name, a C program can have

- Any number of compatible declarations.
- But only a single definition.

```c
/* 
 * "myLib.h": Library interface, header file
 */

extern int state; // Declaration
```

```c
/* "myLib.c": Library implementation, source file */

int state = 0; // Definition
```

```c
/* "main.c": Application code, source file */

#include "myLib.h"

int main(void)
{
    state = 7; // Modifies `state` in myLib.c
}
```

A declaration of a variable outside function definitions specifies that the variable is defined in a different file.

```c
extern int sum; // `sum` is define in a different file

int main() {
    return 0;
}
```

A global variable in C is implicitly visible in all subsequent functions in the file, except those that include a declaration of a local variable with the same name.

```c
extern int sum;

void foo() {
    float sum;
    // can not use int `sum` here
}
```

A global variable that is defined after a function can be made visible in the function by declaring it to be external.

```c
void printValue();

int main() {
    printValue();
    return 0;
}

void printValue() {
    extern int sum;
    printf("%d\n", sum);
}

// `sum` is defined after a function
int sum = 42;
```

In C99,

- Definitions of global variables *usually* have initial values.
- Declarations of global variables never have initial values.

If the declaration is outside function definitions, it need not include the `extern` qualifier.

```c
int sum; // uninitialized

int main() {
    printf("%d\n", sum);
    return 0;
}
```

This idea of declarations and definitions carries over to the *functions* of C and C++, where prototypes declare names and interfaces of functions but do not provide their code. Function definitions, on the other hand, are complete.

In C++, a global variable that is hidden by a local with the same name can be accessed using the *scope operator* (`::`). For example, if `x` is a global that is hidden in a function by a local named `x`, the global could be referenced as `::x`.

```cpp
int x = 10; // global variable

int main() {
    int x = 20; // local variable, hides the global variable
    cout << "local x: " << x << endl;    // 20
    cout << "global x: " << ::x << endl; // 10
    return 0;
}
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

PHP statements can be interspersed with function definitions. (可以在文件中任意位置定義函數。)

Variables in PHP are implicitly declared when they appear in statements.

- Any variable that is implicitly declared outside any function is a global variable.
- Variables implicitly declared in functions are local variables.

The scope of global variables

- Extends from their declarations to the end of the program.
- But *skips over* any subsequent function definitions.
- So, global variables are not implicitly visible in any function.

Global variables can be made visible in functions in their scope in two ways:

1. If the function includes a local variable with the same name as a global, that global can be accessed through the `$GLOBALS` array, using the name of the global as a string literal subscript.
2. If there is no local variable in the function with the same name as the global, the global can be made visible by including it in a `global` declaration statement.

Consider the following example:

```php
$day = "Monday";
$month = "January";

function calendar() {
    $day = "Tuesday";
    global $month;
    print "local day is $day ";
    $gday = $GLOBALS['day'];
    print "global day is $gday <br \>";
    print "global month is $month ";
}

calendar();
```

Interpretation of this code produces the following:

```text
local day is Tuesday
global day is Monday
global month is January
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The global variables of JavaScript are very similar to those of PHP, except that there is no way to access a global variable in a function that has declared a local variable with the same name.

```js
let x = 'global';

(() => {
    let x = 'local';

    // 無法像 PHP 一樣，存取被遮蔽的 global `x`
    console.log(x); // local `x`
})();
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The visibility rules for global variables in Python are unusual. Variables are not normally declared, as in PHP. They are implicitly declared when they appear as the targets of assignment statements.

A global variable can be referenced in a function, but a global variable can be assigned in a function only if it has been declared to be global in the function.

Consider the following examples:

```python
day = "Monday"

def tester():
    print("The global day is:", day)

tester()
```

The output of this script, because globals can be referenced directly in functions, is as follows:

```text
The global day is: Monday
```

The following script attempts to assign a new value to the global `day`:

```python
day = "Monday"

def tester():
    print("The global day is:", day) # UnboundLocalError
    day = "Tuesday" # because this assignment makes `day` a local variable
    print("The new value of day is:", day)

tester()
```

The assignment to `day` can be to the global variable if `day` is declared to be `global` at the beginning of the function. This prevents the assignment to day from creating a local variable. This is shown in the following script:

```python
day = "Monday"

def tester():
    global day
    print("The global day is:", day)
    day = "Tuesday"
    print("The new value of day is:", day)

tester()
```

The output of this script is as follows:

```text
The global day is: Monday
The new value of day is: Tuesday
```

Functions can be nested in Python. Variables defined in nesting functions are accessible in a nested function through static scoping, but such variables must be declared `nonlocal` in the nested function. An example skeletal program in Section 5.7 illustrates accesses to nonlocal variables.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

All names defined outside function definitions in F# are globals. Their scope extends from their definitions to the end of the file.

</div>

### Evaluation of Static Scoping

Static scoping provides a method of nonlocal access that works well in many situations.

Problems:

- In most cases, too much access is possible.
- As a program evolves, the initial structure is destroyed and local variables often become global; subprograms also gravitate toward become global, rather than nested.

An alternative to the use of static scoping to control access to variables and subprograms is an **encapsulation** construct, which is included in many newer languages. Encapsulation constructs are discussed in Chapter 11.

## Dynamic Scope

**Dynamic scoping** is <mark>based on the calling sequence of subprograms</mark>, not on their spatial relationship to each other. Thus, the scope can be determined only at *run time*.

<div class="alert-example">

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Assume that dynamic-scoping rules apply to nonlocal references}
\begin{algorithmic}

\function{big}{}
    \function{sub1}{}
        \state x = 7
    \endFunction
    \state \\
    \function{sub2}{}
        \state \comment{假設使用 dynamic scope}
        \state \comment{x 的值無法在編譯時決定，而是取決於函式呼叫順序}
        \state print x
    \endFunction
    \state \\ \comment{假設使用 static scope}
    \state \comment{與呼叫順序無關，sub2() 的 x 都是使用此定義}
    \state x = 3 
\endFunction

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

One way the correct meaning of `x` can be determined during execution is to begin the search with the local declarations. This is also the way the process begins with static scoping.

<div class="stepper">

- <div>

    When the search of local declarations fails, the declarations of the *dynamic parent*, or calling function, are searched.

  </div>

- <div>

    If a declaration for `x` is not found there, the search continues in that function’s dynamic parent, and so forth, until a declaration for `x` is found.

  </div>

- <div>

    If none is found in any dynamic ancestor, it is a run-time error.

  </div>

</div>

Consider the two different call sequences for `sub2()` in the earlier example.

<div class="alert-example">

First, `big()` calls `sub1()`, which calls `sub2()`. In this case,

- The search proceeds from the local procedure, `sub2()`, to its caller, `sub1()`, where a declaration for `x` is found.
- So, the reference to `x` in `sub2()` in this case is to the `x` declared in `sub1()`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Next, `sub2()` is called directly from `big()`. In this case,

- The dynamic parent of `sub2()` is `big()`.
- The reference is to the `x` declared in `big()`.

</div>

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Perl’s dynamic scoping is unusual—in fact, it is not exactly like that discussed in this section, although the semantics are often that of traditional dynamic scoping (see Programming Exercise 1).

</div>

### Evaluation of Dynamic Scoping

Programs in static-scoped languages are easier to read, are more reliable, and execute faster than equivalent programs in dynamic-scoped languages. It was precisely for these reasons that dynamic scoping was replaced by static scoping.

***Advantages***

The parameters passed from one subprogram to another are variables that are defined in the caller. None of these needs to be passed in a dynamically scoped language, because they are implicitly visible in the called subprogram.

***Disadvantages***

When dynamic scoping is used,

- The correct attributes of nonlocal variables visible to a program statement cannot be determined statically.
- Furthermore, a reference to the name of such a variable is not always to the same variable.
- A statement in a subprogram that contains a reference to a nonlocal variable can refer to different nonlocal variables during different executions of the subprogram.

Several kinds of programming problems follow directly from dynamic scoping.

- First

    - While a subprogram is executing, its variables are visible to all subprograms it calls.
    - There is no way to protect local variables from this accessibility.
    - Subprograms are always executed in the environment of all previously called subprograms that have not yet completed their executions.

    As a result, dynamic scoping results in less reliable programs than static scoping.

- Second

    - Impossible to statically type check.

- Third

    - Dynamic scoping also makes programs much more difficult to read, because the calling sequence of subprograms must be known to determine the meaning of references to nonlocal variables.

- Finally

    - Accesses to nonlocal variables in dynamic-scoped languages take far longer than accesses to nonlocals when static scoping is used. The reason for this is explained in Chapter 10.
