# Scope and Lifetime

***When They Seem Related***

Sometimes the scope and lifetime of a variable appear to be related.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider a variable that is declared in a Java method that contains no method calls.

- The scope of such a variable is from its declaration to the end of the method.
- The lifetime of that variable is the period of time beginning when the method is entered and ending when execution of the method terminates.

Although the scope and lifetime of the variable are clearly not the same, because static scope is a textual, or spatial, concept whereas lifetime is a temporal concept, they at least appear to be related in this case.

</div>

***When They Are Unrelated***

This apparent relationship between scope and lifetime does *not* hold in other situations.

<div class="alert-example">

In C and C++,

- A variable that is declared in a function using the specifier `static` is statically bound to the scope of that function and is also statically bound to storage.
- So, its scope is static and local to the function, but its lifetime extends over the entire execution of the program of which it is a part.

</div>

Scope and lifetime are also unrelated when subprogram calls are involved.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following C++ functions:

```cpp
void printHeader() {
    ...
} /* end of printHeader */

void compute() {
    int sum;
    ...
    printHeader();
} /* end of compute */
```

The scope of the variable `sum`

- is completely contained within the `compute()` function.
- It does not extend to the body of the function `printHeader()`, although `printHeader()` executes in the midst of the execution of `compute()`.

However, The lifetime of `sum`

- extends over the time during which `printHeader()` executes.
- Whatever storage location `sum` is bound to before the call to `printHeader()`, that binding will continue during and after the execution of `printHeader()`.

</div>
