# Named Constants

A **named constant** is a variable that is bound to a value only *once*.

- Named constants are useful as aids to readability and program reliability. Readability can be improved, for example, using the name `pi` instead of the constant `3.14159265`.
- Another important use of named constants is to parameterize a program.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider a program that processes a fixed number of data values, say 100.

Such a program usually uses the constant `100` in a number of locations for declaring array subscript ranges and for `loop` control limits.

Consider the following skeletal Java program segment:

```java
void example() {
    int[] intList = new int[100];
    String[] strList = new String[100];
    ...
    for (index = 0; index < 100; index++) {
        ...
    }
    ...
    for (index = 0; index < 100; index++) {
        ...
    }
    ...
    average = sum / 100;
    ...
}
```

When this program must be modified to deal with a different number of data values, all occurrences of `100` must be found and changed. On a large program, this can be tedious and error prone.

An easier and more reliable method is to use a named constant as a program parameter, as follows:

```java
void example() {
    final int len = 100;
    int[] intList = new int[len];
    String[] strList = new String[len];
    ...
    for (index = 0; index < len; index++) {
        ...
    }
    ...
    for (index = 0; index < len; index++) {
        ...
    }
    ...
    average = sum / len;
    ...
}
```

Now, when the length must be changed, only one line must be changed (the variable `len`), regardless of the number of times it is used in the program.

This is another example of the benefits of abstraction. The name `len` is an abstraction for the number of elements in some arrays and the number of iterations in some loops. This illustrates how named constants can aid modifiability.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

C++ allows dynamic binding of values to named constants. This allows expressions containing variables to be assigned to constants in the declarations.

For example, the C++ statement

```cpp
const int result = 2 * width + 1;
```

declares `result` to be an integer type named constant whose value is set to the value of the expression `2 * width + 1`, where the value of the variable `width` must be visible when `result` is allocated and bound to its value.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Java also allows dynamic binding of values to named constants. In Java, named constants are defined with the `final` reserved word (as in the earlier example).

The initial value can be given in the declaration statement or in a subsequent assignment statement. The assigned value can be specified with any expression.

```java
final double PI = 3.14159;
final int RANDOM_NUMBER = (int) (Math.random() * 100);
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

C# has two kinds of named constants:

- Those defined with `const`.

    The `const` named constants, which are implicitly `static`, are statically bound to values; that is, they are bound to values at compile time, which means those values can be specified only with literals or other const members.

    So, if a program needs a constant-valued object whose value is the same on every use of the program, a `const` constant is used.

- Those defined with `readonly`.

    The `readonly` named constants, which are *dynamically* bound to values, can be assigned in the declaration or with a static constructor.

    However, if a program needs a constant-valued object whose value is determined only when the object is created and can be different for different executions of the program, then a `readonly` constant is used.

</div>

## Initialization

The discussion of binding values to named constants naturally leads to the topic of initialization, because binding a value to a *named constant* is the same process, except it is *permanent*.

The binding of a variable to a value at the time it is bound to storage is called **initialization**.

- If the variable is *statically* bound to storage, binding and initialization occur before run time.

    In these cases, the initial value must be specified as a literal or an expression whose only nonliteral operands are named constants that have already been defined.

- If the storage binding is *dynamic*, initialization is also dynamic and the initial values can be any expression.

In most languages, initialization is specified on the declaration that creates the variable.

<div class="alert-example">

In C++, we could have

```cpp
int sum = 0;
int* ptrSum = &sum;
char name[] = "George Washington Carver";
```

</div>
