# O-Notation, &Omega;-Notation, and &Theta;-Notation

此章節簡易介紹各漸近符號，正式定義在 [3-2]。

[3-2]: /notes/computer-science/演算法/ch03/3-2

## O-Notation

**O-notation** characterizes an *upper bound* on the asymptotic behavior of a function. In other words, it says that a function <mark>grows no faster than a certain rate</mark>, based on the highest-order term.

<div class="alert-example">

The function $7n^3 + 100n^2 - 20n + 6$. Its highest-order term is $7n^3$ , and so we say that this function’s rate of growth is $n^3$ . Because this function grows no faster than $n^3$ , we can write that it is $O(n^3)$.

You might be surprised that we can also write that the function $7n^3 + 100n^2 - 20n + 6$ is $O(n^4)$. Why? Because the function grows more slowly than $n^4$ , we are correct in saying that it grows no faster. As you might have guessed, this function is also $O(n^5)$, $O(n^6)$, and so on. More generally, it is $O(n^c)$ for any constant $c \geq 3$.

</div>

## &Omega;-Notation

**&Omega;-notation** characterizes a *lower bound* on the asymptotic behavior of a function. In other words, it says that a function <mark>grows at least as fast as a certain rate</mark>, based—as in O-notation—on the highest-order term.

<div class="alert-example">

Because the highest-order term in the function $7n^3 + 100n^2 - 20n + 6$ grows at least as fast as $n^3$, this function is $\Omega(n^3)$. This function is also $\Omega(n^2)$ and $\Omega(n)$. More generally, it is $\Omega(n^c)$ for any constant $c \leq 3$.

</div>

## &Theta;-Notation

**&Theta;-notation** characterizes a *tight bound* on the asymptotic behavior of a function. It says that a function <mark>grows precisely at a certain rate</mark>, based—once again—on the highest-order term. Put another way, &Theta;-notation characterizes the rate of growth of the function to within a constant factor from above and to within a constant factor from below. These two constant factors need not be equal.

If you can show that a function is both $O(f(n))$ and $\Omega(f(n))$ for some function $f(n)$, then you have shown that the function is $\Theta(f(n))$. (The next section states this fact as a theorem.)

<div class="alert-example">

Since the function $7n^3 + 100n^2 - 20n + 6$ is both $O(n^3)$ and $\Omega(n^3)$, it is also $\Theta(n^3)$.

</div>
