# Programming Domains

## Scientific Applications

- Required large numbers of *floating-point arithmetic computations*.
- The most common data structures were *arrays* and *matrices*.
- The most common control structures were counting loops and selections.
- The first language for scientific applications was **Fortran**. Its competition was **assembly language**, so *efficiency* was a primary concern.

## Business Applications

- Business languages are characterized by facilities for *producing elaborate reports*.
- Precise ways of describing and storing *decimal numbers* and *character data*, and the ability to specify decimal arithmetic operations.
- The first successful high-level language for business was **COBOL**.

## Artificial Intelligence

- Characterized by the use of symbolic rather than numeric computations.
- *Symbolic computation* means that symbols, consisting of names rather than numbers, are manipulated.
- Symbolic computation is more conveniently done with *linked lists* of data rather than arrays.
- The first widely used programming language developed for AI applications was the *functional language* **Lisp**.

    - Most AI applications developed prior to 1990 were written in Lisp or one of its close relatives.
    - In the early 1970s, **Prolog** emerged as an alternative approach to logic programming for some AI applications.
    - More recently, some AI applications have been written in systems languages such as **Python**.

| Language                                          | Discussed in    |
| ------------------------------------------------- | --------------- |
| <ruby>**Scheme**<rt>a dialect of Lisp</rt></ruby> | [Chapters 15][] |
| **Prolog**                                        | [Chapters 16][] |

[Chapters 15]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch15/15-1
[Chapters 16]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch16/16-1

This kind of programming sometimes requires more flexibility than other programming domains. For example, in some AI applications the ability to create and execute code segments during execution is convenient.

## Web Software

The World Wide Web is supported by an eclectic collection of languages, ranging from

- *Markup languages*, such as **HTML**, which is not a programming language.
- *Scripting language*, such as **JavaScript** or **PHP**.
- *General-purpose programming languages*, such as **Java**.
