# Language Categories

Programming languages are often categorized into four bins:

- **Imperative** programming languages
    - **Object-oriented** programming languages
- **Functional** programming languages
- **Logic** programming languages

## Imperative Programming Languages

Central features are

- Variables
- Assignment statements
- Iteration

?> See [1-4](/notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch01/1-4?id=imperative-languages)

***Object-Oriented Programming Languages***

**OOP** grew out of imperative languages.

- The expressions, assignment statements, and control statements of C and Java are nearly *identical*.
- On the other hand, the arrays, subprograms, and semantics of Java are very *different* from those of C.
- Similar statements can be made for functional languages that support object-oriented programming.

***Scripting Languages***

Languages in this category are bound together more by their implementation method, partial or full **interpretation**, than by a common language design.

The languages that are typically called **scripting languages**, among them Perl, JavaScript, and Ruby, are imperative languages in every sense.

## Functional Programming Language

- Main means of making computations is by applying functions to given parameters.
- Examples: LISP, Scheme, ML, F#.

## Logic Programming Language

In an imperative language,

- An algorithm is specified in great detail.
- The specific order of execution of the instructions or statements must be included.

A logic programming language is an example of a *rule-based* language.

- Rules are specified in no particular order.
- The language implementation system must choose an order in which the rules are used to produce the desired result.

Prolog, the most commonly used logic programming language. Logic programming are discussed in Chapter 16.

## Markup languages

In recent years, a new category of languages has emerged, the markup/programming hybrid languages. Markup languages are *not* programming languages.

For instance, HTML, the most widely used markup language, is used to specify the layout of information in Web documents.

However, some programming capability has crept into some extensions to HTML and XML. Among these are the

- Java Server Pages Standard Tag Library (JSTL)
- eXtensible Stylesheet Language Transformations (XSLT).

Both of these are briefly introduced in Chapter 2.
