# Language Design Trade-Offs

The programming language evaluation criteria described in [1-3][] provide a framework for language design. Unfortunately, that framework is *self-contradictory*.

[1-3]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch01/1-3

***Reliability vs. Cost of Execution***

The designers of Java traded execution efficiency for reliability.

?> The Java language definition demands that all references to array elements be checked to ensure that the index or indices are in their legal ranges.

- This step adds a great deal to the cost of execution of Java programs that contain large numbers of references to array elements.
- C does not require index range checking.
- C programs execute faster than semantically equivalent Java programs.
- Java programs are more reliable.

***Readability vs. Writability***

The designer of APL traded readability for writability.

?> APL includes a powerful set of operators for array operands.

- Because of the large number of operators, a significant number of new symbols had to be included in APL to represent the operators.
- Also, many APL operators can be used in a single, long, complex expression. One result of this high degree of expressivity is that, for applications involving many array operations, APL is very writable.
- Indeed, a huge amount of computation can be specified in a very small program.
- Another result is that APL programs have very poor readability. A compact and concise expression has a certain mathematical beauty but it is difficult for anyone other than the programmer to understand.

***Writability (Flexibility) vs. Reliability***

The pointers of C++ can be manipulated in a variety of ways, which supports highly flexible addressing of data. Because of the potential reliability problems with pointers, they are not included in Java.
