# Arrays

## The Abstract Data Type

We begin our discussion by considering an array as an ADT.

- This is not the usual perspective since many programmers view an array only as “a consecutive set of memory locations.”
- This is unfortunate because it clearly shows an emphasis on implementation issues. Thus, <mark>although an array is usually implemented as a consecutive set of memory locations, this is not always the case.</mark>

***Operations***

Intuitively an array is a set of pairs, $\langle \text{ index, value } \rangle$, such that each index that is defined has a value associated with it. In mathematical terms, we call this a **correspondence** or a **mapping**. However, when considering an ADT we are more concerned with the operations that can be performed on an array.

Aside from creating a new array, most languages provide only two standard operations for arrays:

- Retrieves a value.
- Stores a value.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{ADT Array}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state $\textbf{objects:}$
\state  A set of pairs $\langle \text{ index, value } \rangle$ \\
        where for each value of index there is a value from the set item. \\
        Index is a finite ordered set of one or more dimensions, for example, \\
        \{0, $\cdots$, $n-1$\} for one dimension, \\
        \{(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1), (2, 0), (2, 1)\} for two dimensions, etc. \\\\

\state $\textbf{functions:}$
\state  for all A $\in$ Array, \\
        $\hspace{2.65em}$ i $\in$ index, \\
        $\hspace{2.65em}$ x $\in$ item, \\
        $\hspace{2.65em}$ j, size $\in$ integer

\state \\

\function{Create}{j, list}
    \return an array of j dimensions \\
            where list is a j-tuple whose ith element is the the size of the ith dimension. \\
            Items are undefined.
\endFunction

\state \\

\function{Retrieve}{A, i}
    \if{i $\in$ index}
        \return the item associated with index value i in array A
    \else
        \return error
    \endIf
\endFunction

\state \\

\function{Store}{A, i, x}
    \if{i $\in$ index}
        \return an array that is identical to array A \\
                except the new pair $\langle \text{ i, x } \rangle$ has been inserted.
    \else
        \return error
    \endIf
\endFunction

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

The function

- $\text{Create}$ produces a new, empty array of the appropriate size. All of the items are initially undefined.
- $\text{Retrieve}$ accepts an array and an index. It returns the value associated with the index if the index is valid, or an error if the index is invalid.
- $\text{Store}$ accepts an array, an index, and an item, and returns the original array augmented with the new $\langle \text{ index, value } \rangle$ pair.

The advantage of this ADT definition is that it clearly points out the fact that the array is a more general structure than “a consecutive set of memory locations.”

## Arrays in C

We restrict ourselves initially to one-dimensional arrays. A one-dimensional array in C is declared implicitly by appending brackets to the name of a variable.

<div class="alert-example">

```c
int list[5], *plist[5];
```

declares two arrays each containing five elements.

- The first array defines five integers.
- The second defines five pointers to integers.

---

- In C all arrays start at index 0, so `list[0]`, `list[1]`, `list[2]`, `list[3]`, and `list[4]` (abbreviated $\text{list [0:4]}$) are the names of the five array elements, each of which contains an integer value.
- Similarly, $\text{plist [0:4]} \ $ are the names of five array elements, each of which contains a pointer to an integer.

</div>

We now consider the implementation of one-dimensional arrays. When the compiler encounters an array declaration such as the one used above to create list, it allocates five consecutive memory locations.

- Each memory location is large enough to hold a single integer.
- The address of the first element `list[0]`, is called the **base address**. If the size of an integer on your machine is denoted by `sizeof(int)`, then the memory address of `list[i]` is $\alpha + i \times \text{sizeof(int)} \ $, where $\alpha$ is the base address. In fact, when we write `list[i]` in a C program, C *interprets* it as a pointer to an integer whose address is `list[i]` is $\alpha + i \times \text{sizeof(int)} \ $.

<div class="alert-example">

Observe that there is a difference between a declaration such as

```c
int *list1;
```

and

```c
int list2[5];
```

The variables `list1` and `list2` are both pointers to an `int`, but in the second case five memory locations for holding integers have been *reserved*.

- `list2` is a pointer to `list2[0]`.
- `list2 + i` is a pointer to `list2[i]`.

Notice that in C, we do not multiply the offset `i` with the size of the type to get to the appropriate element of the array. Thus, <mark>regardless of the type</mark> of the array `list2`, it is always the case that (`list2 + i`) equals `&list2[i]`. So, `*(list2 + i)` equals `list2[i]`.

</div>

It is useful to consider the way C treats an array when it is a parameter to a function. All parameters of a C function must be declared within the function. However, the range of a one-dimensional array is defined only in the main program since new storage for an array is not allocated within a function. <mark>If the size of a one-dimensional array is needed, it must be either passed into the function as an argument or accessed as a global variable.</mark>

<div class="alert-example">

```c
#include <stdio.h>

#define MAX_SIZE 100

float sum(float[], int);
float input[MAX_SIZE], answer;

int main(void) {
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i < MAX_SIZE; i++) {
        input[i] = i;
    }
    answer = sum(input, MAX_SIZE);
    printf("The sum is: %f\n", answer);
}

float sum(float list[], int n) {
    int i;
    float tempSum = 0;
    for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
        tempSum += list[i];
    }
    return tempSum;
}
```

When `sum` is invoked, `input = &input[0]` is copied into a temporary location and associated with the formal parameter list.

- When `list[i]` occurs on the right-hand side of the equals sign, a dereference takes place and the value pointed at by `(list + i)` is returned.
- If `list[i]` appears on the left-hand side of the equals sign, then the value produced on the right-hand side is stored in the location `(list + i)`.

Thus in C, array parameters have their values *altered*, despite the fact that the parameter passing is done using call-by-value.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

One-dimensional array addressing: Assume that we have the following declaration:

```c
int one[] = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4};
```

We would like to write a function that prints out both the address of the ith element of this array and the value found at this address. To do this, `print1` uses pointer arithmetic.

- The function is invoked as `print1(&one[0], 5)`.
- As you can see from the `printf` statement, the address of the ith element is simply `ptr + i`. To obtain the value of the ith element, we use the dereferencing operator, `*`. Thus, `*(ptr + i)` indicates that we want the contents of the `ptr + i` position rather than the address.

```c
/* print out a one-dimensional array using a pointer */
void print1(int *ptr, int rows) {
    int i;
    printf("Address Contents\n\n");
    for (i = 0; i < rows; i++) {
        printf("%10u%5d\n", ptr + i, *(ptr + i));
    }
    printf("\n");
}
```

```output
Address Contents

1413085952    0
1413085956    1
1413085960    2
1413085964    3
1413085968    4
```

Figure shows the results we obtained when we ran `print1`. Notice that the addresses increase by four because each int is 4 bytes on our machine.

</div>
