# Structures and Unions

## Structures

- Arrays are collections of data of the same type.
- In C there is an alternative way to group data that permits the data to vary in type. This mechanism is called the `struct`, short for structure.

A structure (called a record in many other programming languages) is a collection of data items, where each item is identified as to its type and name.

<div class="alert-example">

```c
struct {  // 匿名結構
    char name[10];
    int age; 
    float salary;
} person;  // 該結構的變數(實例)
```

creates a variable whose name is person and that has three fields:

- A name that is a character array.
- An integer value representing the age of the person.
- A float value representing the salary of the individual.

We may assign values to these fields as below. Notice the use of the `.` as the structure **member operator**. We use this operator to select a particular member of the structure.

```c
strcpy(person.name, "james");
person.age = 10;
person.salary = 35000;
```

</div>

We can create our own structure data types by using the `typedef` statement as below:

<div class="alert-example">

```c
// 為此匿名結構設定一個別名 humanBeing
typedef struct {
    char name[10];
    int age;
    float salary;
} humanBeing;
```

This says that `humanBeing` is the name of the type defined by the structure definition, and we may follow this definition with declarations of variables such as:

```c
humanBeing person1, person2; 
```

We might have a program segment that says:

```c
if (strcmp(person1.name, person2.name)) 
    printf("The two people do not have the same name\n"); 
else 
    printf("The two people have the same name\n"); 
```

</div>

***Structure Assignment***

It would be nice if we could write `if (person1 == person2)` and have the entire structure checked for equality, or if we could write `person1 = person2` and have that mean that the value of every field of the structure of `person2` is assigned as the value of the corresponding field of `person1`.

<div class="alert-example">

```c
#include <stdio.h>

typedef struct date {
    int month;
    int day;
    int year;
} Date;

int main(void) {
    struct date d1 = {1, 2, 3};
    Date d2 = d1;  // 使用別名宣告更為簡潔
    printf("d2.day: %d\n", d2.day);
    printf("&d1: %p\n&d2: %p", &d1, &d2);
}
```

```output
d2.day: 2
&d1: 00000000005FFEC4
&d2: 00000000005FFEB8
```

</div>

<div class="alert-warning">

*ANSI C* permits structure assignment, but most <mark>earlier versions of C do not.</mark> For older versions of C, we are forced to write the more detailed form:

```c
strcpy(person1.name, person2.name);
person1.age = person2.age;
person1.salary = person2.salary;
```

</div>

***Comparing Two Structures***

While structures cannot be directly checked for equality or inequality, we can write a function to do this. `TRUE` and `FALSE` are defined as:

```c
#define FALSE 0
#define TRUE 1
```

<div class="alert-example">

A typical function call might be:

```c
if (humansEqual(person1,person2)) 
    printf("The two human beings are the same\n");
else 
    printf("The two human beings are not the same\n");
```

```c
/*
 * return TRUE if person1 and person2 are the same human being
 * otherwise return FALSE
 */
int humansEqual(humanBeing person1, humanBeing person2) {
    if (strcmp(person1.name, person2.name))
        return FALSE;
    if (person1.age != person2.age)
        return FALSE;
    if (person1.salary != person2.salary)
        return FALSE;
    return TRUE;
}
```

</div>

***Nested Structures***

We can also embed a structure within a structure.

<div class="alert-example">

Associated with our `humanBeing` structure we may wish to include the date of his or her birth. We can do this by writing:

```c
typedef struct {
    int month;
    int day;
    int year;
} date;

typedef struct {
    char name[10];
    int age;
    float salary;
    date dob;  // date of birth
} humanBeing;
```

A person born on February 11, 1944, would have the values for the `date` struct set as:

```c
person1.dob.month = 2;
person1.dob.day = 11;
person1.dob.year = 1944;
```

</div>

## Unions

Continuing with our `humanBeing` example, it would be nice if we could distinguish between males and females.

- In the case of males we might ask whether they have a beard or not.
- In the case of females we might wish to know the number of children they have borne.

This gives rise to another feature of C called a union. A union declaration is similar to a structure, but <mark>the fields of a union must share their memory space.</mark> This means that only *one* field of the union is *active* at any given time.

<div class="alert-example">

To add different fields for males and females we would change our definition of humanBeing to:

```c
enum tagField { female, male };

typedef struct {
    enum tagField sex;
    union {
        int children;
        int beard;
    } u;
} sexType;

typedef struct {
    char name[10];
    int age;
    float salary;
    date dob;
    sexType sexInfo;
} humanBeing;

humanBeing person1, person2;
```

We could assign values to `person1` and `person2` as:

```c
person1.sexInfo.sex = male;
person1.sexInfo.u.beard = FALSE;
```

and

```c
person2.sexInfo.sex = female;
person2.sexInfo.u.children = 4;
```

Notice that we first place a value in the tag field. This allows us to determine which field in the union is active. We then place a value in the appropriate field of the union. For example:

- If the value of `sexInfo.sex` was `male`, we would enter a `TRUE` or a `FALSE` in the `sexInfo.u.beard` field.
- If the person was a `female`, we would enter an integer value in the `sexInfo.u.children` field.

C does *not* verify that we use the appropriate field.

- For instance, we could place a value of `female` in the `sexInfo.sex field`, and then proceed to place a value of `TRUE` in `the sexInfo.u.beard` field.
- Although we know that this is not appropriate, C does not require us to use the correct fields of a union.

</div>

## Self-Referential Structure

A self-referential structure is one in which one or more of its components is a pointer to itself. Self-referential structures usually require dynamic storage management routines (`malloc` and `free`) to explicitly obtain and release memory.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider as an example:

```c
typedef struct {
    char data;
    list *link;
} list;
```

Each instance of the structure `list` will have two components, `data` and `link`.

- `data` is a single character, while
- `link` is a pointer to a `list` structure. The value of `link` is either the address in memory of an instance of `list` or the null pointer.

Consider these statements, which create three structures and assign values to their respective fields:

```c
list item1, item2, item3;
item1.data = 'a';
item2.data = 'b';
item3.data = 'c';
item1.link = item2.link = item3.link = NULL;
```

Structures `item1`, `item2`, and `item3` each contain the data item `'a'`, `'b'`, and `'c'`, respectively, and the null pointer.

We can attach these structures together by replacing the null link field in `item2` with one that points to `item3` and by replacing the null link field in `item1` with one that points to item2

```c
item1.link = &item2;
item2.link = &item3;

```

We will see more of this linking in Chapter 4.

</div>
