# Representation of Multidimensional Arrays

In C, multidimensional arrays are represented using the array-of-arrays representation (Section [2-2][]).

[2-2]: /notes/computer-science/資料結構/ch02/2-2?id=two-dimensional-arrays

---

An alternative to the array-of-arrays representation is to *map* all elements of a multidimensional array into an ordered or linear list.

- The linear list is then <mark>stored in consecutive memory just as we store a one-dimensional array.</mark>
- This mapping of a multidimensional array to memory requires a more complex *addressing formula* that required by the mapping of a one-dimensional array to memory.

If an array is declared $a[\text{upper}_0][\text{upper}_1] \cdots [\text{upper}_{n-1}]$, then it is easy to see that the number of elements in the array is:

$$
\prod_{i=0}^{n-1} \text{upper}_i
$$

where $\prod$ is the product of the $\text{upper}_i$’s.

<div class="alert-example">

If we declare a as `A[10][10][10]`, then we require $10 \times 10 \times 10 = 1000$ units of storage to hold the array.

</div>

There are two common ways to represent multidimensional arrays:

- **Row major order**
- **Column major order**

We consider only row major order here, leaving column major order for the exercises.

## Row Major Order

As its name implies, row major order stores multidimensional arrays by rows.

***Two-Dimensional Array***

<div class="alert-example">

We interpret the two-dimensional array $A[\text{upper}_0][\text{upper}_1]$ as $\text{upper}_0$ rows, $\text{row}_0,\ \text{row}_1,\ \cdots,\ \text{row}_{\text{upper}_0-1}$, each row containing $\text{upper}_1$ elements.

</div>

If we assume that $\alpha$ is the address of `A[0][0]`, then

- The address of `A[i][0]` is $\alpha + i \times \text{upper}_1$ because there are $i$ rows, each of size $\text{upper}_1$, preceding the first element in the ith row.
- The address of an arbitrary element, `A[i][j]`, is

$$
\alpha + i \times \text{upper}_1 + j
$$

Notice that we haven’t multiplied by the element size. This follows C convention in which the size of the elements is automatically accounted for.

***Three-Dimensional Array***

To represent a three-dimensional array, $A[\text{upper}_0][\text{upper}_1][\text{upper}_2]$, we interpret the array as $\text{upper}_0$ two-dimensional arrays of dimension $\text{upper}_1 \times \text{upper}_2$.

<div class="alert-example">

```c
int A[3][4][5];
```

理解成 3 個二維陣列，每個大小為 $4 \times 5$。

</div>

To locate `A[i][j][k]`,

- we first obtain $\alpha + i \times \text{upper}_1 \times \text{upper}_2$ as the address of `A[i][0][0]` because there are $i$ two-dimensional arrays of size $\text{upper}_1 \times \text{upper}_2$ preceding this element.
- Combining this formula with the formula for addressing a two-dimensional array, we obtain:

$$
\alpha + i \times \text{upper}_1 \times \text{upper}_2 + j \times \text{upper}_2 + k
$$

***Addressing Formula***

Generalizing on the preceding discussion, we can obtain the addressing formula for any element $A[i_0][i_1] \dots [i_{n-1}]$ in an $n$-dimensional array declared as:

$$
A[\text{upper}_0][\text{upper}_1] \dots [\text{upper}_{n-1}]
$$

If $\alpha$ is the address for $A[0][0]...[0]$ then the address of $A[i_0][0]...[0]$ is:

$$
\alpha + i_0 \times \text{upper}_1 \times \text{upper}_2 \times \dots \times \text{upper}_{n-1}
$$

The address of $A[i_0][i_1][0]...[0]$ is:

$$
\begin{align}
\alpha
& + i_0 \times \text{upper}_1 \times \text{upper}_2 \times \dots \times \text{upper}_{n-1}\\
& + i_1 \times \text{upper}_2 \times \text{upper}_3 \times \dots \times \text{upper}_{n-1}
\end{align}
$$

Repeating in this way the address for $A[i_0][i_1]...[i_{n-1}]$ is:

$$
\begin{align}
\alpha
& + i_0 \times \text{upper}_1 \times \text{upper}_2 \times \dots \times \text{upper}_{n-1} \\
& + i_1 \times \text{upper}_2 \times \text{upper}_3 \times \dots \times \text{upper}_{n-1} \\
& + i_2 \times \text{upper}_3 \times \text{upper}_4 \times \dots \times \text{upper}_{n-1} \\
& \ \ \vdots \\
& + i_{n-2} \times \text{upper}_{n-1} \\
& + i_{n-1} \\\\
= \alpha
& + \sum_{j=0}^{n-1} i_j a_j \qquad \text{where:}
\begin{cases}
a_j = \prod_{k=j+1}^{n-1} \text{upper}_k \quad 0 \leq j < n-1 \\\\
a_{n-1} = 1
\end{cases}
\end{align}
$$

Notice that $a_j$ may be computed from $a_{j+1},\ 0 \leq j < n-1$, using only one multiplication as $a_j = \text{upper}_{j+1} \times a_{j+1}$. Thus, a compiler will initially take the declared bounds $\text{upper}_0,\ \ldots,\ \text{upper}_{n-1}$ and use them to compute the constants $a_0,\ \ldots, a_{n-2}$ using $n-2$ multiplications. (讀取陣列的每一維範圍後，利用 $a_{j+1}$ 去計算 $a_j$，意味著可以一個個往前回推，逐步算出所有 $a_j$)

The address of $a[i_0] \ldots a[i_{n-1}]$ can be computed using the formula, requiring

- $n-1$ more multiplications. (每個索引 $i_j$ 與其對應的 $a_j$ 相乘，但最後一項 $a_{n-1} = 1$，所以那個乘法可以省略)
- $n$ additions. (每一項相加)
- $n$ subtractions.

理論上會需要使用減法減去該維度的 index 下界，因為有些語言的陣列 index 並非只能從 0 開始，只是在 C 語言中，index 固定從 0 開始，所以前述公式中才會忽略掉 index 起始值，也就是下界 $L_j$。

$$
\alpha + \sum_{j=0}^{n-1} (i_j - L_j) a_j
$$
