# Exception Handling in C++

The exception handling of C++ was accepted by the ANSI C++ standardization
committee in 1990 and subsequently found its way into C++ implementations.
The design is based in part on the exception handling of CLU, Ada, and ML.

## Exception Handlers

C++ uses a special construct that is introduced with the reserved word `try` to specify the scope for exception handlers.

- A `try` construct includes a compound statement called the **try clause** and a list of exception handlers.
- The compound statement defines the scope of the following handlers.

The general form of this construct is as follows:

```cpp
try {
    //** Code that might raise an exception
} catch (formal parameter) {
    //** A handler body
}
...
catch(formal parameter) {
    //** A handler body
}
```

Each `catch` function is an exception handler.

- A `catch` function can have only a single formal parameter, which is similar to a formal parameter in a function definition in C++, including the possibility of it being an ellipsis (...).
- A handler with an ellipsis formal parameter is the catch-all handler; it is enacted for any raised exception if no appropriate handler was found.
- The formal parameter also can be a naked type specifier, such as `float`, as in a function prototype. In such a case, the only purpose of the formal parameter is to make the handler uniquely identifiable.
- When information about the exception is to be passed to the handler, the formal parameter includes a variable name that is used for that purpose. Because the class of the parameter can be any user-defined class, the parameter can include as many data members as are necessary.
- Binding exceptions to handlers are discussed in Section 14.3.2.

In C++, exception handlers can include any C++ code.

## Binding Exceptions to Handlers

C++ exceptions are raised only by the explicit statement `throw`, whose general form in EBNF is as follows:

```cpp
throw [expression];
```

- The brackets here are metasymbols used to specify that the expression is optional.
- A `throw` without an operand can appear only in a handler. When it appears there, it reraises the exception, which is then handled elsewhere.

---

The type of the `throw` expression selects the particular handler, which of course must have a “matching” type formal parameter.

- In this case, *matching* means the following: A handler with a formal parameter of type `T`, `const T`, `T&` (a reference to an object of type `T`), or `const T&` matches a `throw` with an expression of type `T`.
- In the case where `T` is a class, a handler whose parameter is type `T` or any class that is an ancestor of `T` matches.
- There are more complicated situations in which a `throw` expression matches a formal parameter, but they are not described here.

***Exception Handling Workflow***

An exception raised in a `try` clause causes an immediate end to the execution of the code in that `try` clause.

- The search for a matching handler begins with the handlers that immediately follow the `try` clause.
- The matching process is done *sequentially* on the handlers until a match is found. This means that if any other match precedes an exactly matching handler, the exactly matching handler will not be used. Therefore, handlers for specific exceptions are placed at the top of the list, followed by more generic handlers.
- The last handler is often one with an ellipsis (...) formal parameter, which matches any exception. This would guarantee that all exceptions are caught.

***Exception Propagation***

- If an exception is raised in a `try` clause and there is no matching handler associated with that `try` clause, the exception is propagated.
- If the `try` clause is nested inside another `try` clause, the exception is propagated to the handlers associated with the outer `try` clause.
- If none of the enclosing `try` clauses yields a matching handler, the exception is propagated to the caller of the function in which it was raised.
- If the call to the function was not in a `try` clause, the exception is propagated to that function’s caller.

***Default Handler***

If no matching handler is found in the program through this propagation process, the default handler is called. This handler is further discussed in Section 14.2.4.

## Continuation

- After a handler has completed its execution, control flows to the first statement following the `try` construct (the statement immediately after the last handler in the sequence of handlers of which it is an element).
- A handler may reraise an exception, using a `throw` without an expression, in which case that exception is propagated.

## Other Design Choices

In terms of the design issues summarized in Section 14.1.2, the exception handling of C++ is simple.

***User-Defined Exceptions Only***

- There are *only* user-defined exceptions, and they are not specified (though they might be declared as new classes).
- There is a default exception handler, `unexpected`,
    - whose only action is to terminate the program.
    - This handler catches all exceptions not caught by the program.
    - It can be replaced by a user-defined handler. The replacement handler must be a function that returns `void` and takes no parameters. The replacement function is set by assigning its name to `set_terminate`.

***The `throw` Clause***

A C++ function can list the types of the exceptions (the types of the `throw` expressions) that it could raise. This is done by attaching the reserved word `throw`, followed by a parenthesized list of these types, to the function header.

- The purpose of the `throw` clause is to notify users of the function what exceptions might be raised by the function.
- The `throw` clause is in effect a contract between the function and its callers. It guarantees that no other exception will be raised in the function.
- The list of types in the list may be empty, meaning that the function will not raise any exceptions.
- If there is no `throw` specification on the header, the function can raise any exception.
- The list is not part of the function’s type.

<div class="alert-example">

```cpp
int fun() throw (int, char *) { ... }
```

specifies that the function `fun` could raise exceptions of type `int` and `char *` but no others.

</div>

- If the types in the `throw` clause are classes, then the function can raise any exception that is derived from the listed classes.
- If a function header has a `throw` clause and raises an exception that is not listed in the `throw` clause and is not derived from a class listed there, the default handler is called. Note that this error cannot be detected at compile time.

***Restrictions on Function Overriding***

If a function overrides a function that has a `throw` clause, the overriding function cannot have a `throw` clause with more exceptions than the overridden function.

***Exceptions in Standard Libraries***

Although C++ has no predefined exceptions, the standard libraries define and throw exceptions, such as

- `out_of_range`, which can be thrown by library container classes.
- `overflow_error`, which can be thrown by math library functions.

## An Example

The following example program illustrates some simple uses of exception handlers in C++.

The program computes and prints a distribution of input grades by using an array of counters.

- The input is a sequence of grades, terminated by a negative number.
- The negative number raises a `NegativeInputException` exception because the grades must be nonnegative integers.

1. There are 10 categories of grades (0 - 9, 10 - 19, ..., 90 - 100). The grades themselves are used to compute indexes into an array of counters, one for each grade category.
2. Invalid input grades are detected by trapping indexing errors in the counter array.
3. A grade of 100 is special in the computation of the grade distribution because the categories all have 10 possible grade values, except the highest, which has 11 (90, 91, ... , 100). (The fact that there are more possible A grades than B’s or C’s is conclusive evidence of the generosity of teachers.) The grade of 100 is also handled in the same exception handler that is used for invalid input data.

```cpp
// Grade Distribution
// Input:  A list of integer values that represent
//         grades, followed by a negative number
// Output: A distribution of grades, as a percentage for
//         each of the categories 0-9, 10-19, ..., 90-100.
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main() { //* Any exception can be raised
    int new_grade, index, limit_1, limit_2,
        freq[10] = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};

    // The exception definition to deal with the end of data
    class NegativeInputException {
        public:
            NegativeInputException() {
                cout << "End of input data reached" << endl;
            }
    };

    try {
        while (true) {
            cout << "Please input a grade" << endl;
            cin >> new_grade;
            if (new_grade < 0) {
                throw NegativeInputException();
            } //* End of data
            index = new_grade / 10;
            {
                try {
                    if (index > 9) {
                        throw new_grade;
                    }
                    freq[index]++;
                } catch(int grade) { //* Handler for index errors
                    if (grade == 100) {
                        freq[9]++;
                    } else {
                        cout << "Error -- new grade: " << grade << " is out of range" << endl;
                    }
                } 
            }
        }
    } catch(NegativeInputException& e) { //**Handler for negative input
        cout << "Limits Frequency" << endl;
        for (index = 0; index < 10; index++) {
            limit_1 = 10 * index;
            limit_2 = limit_1 + 9;
            if (index == 9) {
                limit_2 = 100;
            }
            cout << limit_1 << "-" << limit_2 << ": " << freq[index] << endl;
        }
    }
}
```

```input
88 120 26 85 53 -1
```

```output
Please input a grade
Please input a grade
Error -- new grade: 120 is out of range
Please input a grade
Please input a grade
Please input a grade
Please input a grade
End of input data reached
Limits Frequency
0-9: 0
10-19: 0
20-29: 1
30-39: 0
40-49: 0
50-59: 1
60-69: 0
70-79: 0
80-89: 2
90-100: 0
```

This program is meant to illustrate the mechanics of C++ exception handling.

Note that the index range exception is often handled in C++ by overloading the indexing operation, which could then raise the exception, rather than the direct detection of the indexing operation with the selection construct used in our example.

## Evaluation

One deficiency of exception handling in C++ is that there are no predefined hardware-detectable exceptions that can be handled by the user.

Exceptions are connected to handlers through a parameter type in which the formal parameter may be omitted.

- The type of the formal parameter of a handler determines the condition under which it is called but may have nothing whatsoever to do with the nature of the raised exception.
- Therefore, the use of predefined types for exceptions certainly does not promote readability.
- It is much better to define classes for exceptions with meaningful names in a meaningful hierarchy that can be used for defining exceptions.
- The exception parameter provides a way to pass information about an exception to the exception handler.
