# Exception Handling in Java

In Chapter 13, the Java example program includes the use of exception handling with little explanation. This section describes the details of Java’s exception-handling capabilities.

Java’s exception handling is based on that of C++, but it is designed to be more in line with the object-oriented language paradigm. Furthermore, Java includes a collection of predefined exceptions that are implicitly raised by the Java run-time system.

## Classes of Exceptions

All Java exceptions are objects of classes that are descendants of the `Throwable` class.

$$
\text{Throwable}
\begin{cases}
    & \text{Error} \\
    & \text{Exception}
    \begin{cases}
        & \text{RuntimeException} \\\\
        & \text{IOException}
    \end{cases}
\end{cases}
$$

The Java system includes two predefined exception classes that are subclasses of `Throwable`: `Error` and `Exception`.

- The `Error` class and its descendants are related to errors that are <mark>thrown by the Java run-time system</mark>, such as running out of heap memory. These exceptions are never thrown by user programs, and they should never be handled there.

There are two system-defined direct descendants of `Exception`: `RuntimeException` and `IOException`.

- As its name indicates, `IOException` is thrown when an error has occurred in an input or output operation, all of which are defined as methods in the various classes defined in the package `java.io`.

- There are predefined classes that are descendants of `RuntimeException`. In most cases, `RuntimeException` is thrown when a user program causes an error.

  <div class="alert-example">

    - `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException`, which is defined in `java.util`, is a commonly thrown exception that descends from `RuntimeException`.
    - Another commonly thrown exception that descends from `RuntimeException` is `NullPointerException`.

  </div>

User programs can define their own exception classes. The convention in Java is that user-defined exceptions are subclasses of `Exception`.

## Exception Handlers

The exception handlers of Java have the same form as those of C++, except that every `catch` must have a parameter and the class of the parameter must be a descendant of the predefined class `Throwable`.

The syntax of the `try` construct in Java is exactly as that of C++, except for the `finally` clause described in Section 14.3.6.

## Binding Exceptions to Handlers

Throwing an exception is simple. An instance of the exception class is given as the operand of the `throw` statement.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose we define an exception named `MyException` as

```java
class MyException extends Exception {
    public MyException() {}
    public MyException(String message) {
        super (message);
    }
}
```

This exception can be thrown with the following statement:

```java
throw new MyException();
```

One of the two constructors we have included in our new class has no parameter and the other has a `String` object parameter that it sends to the superclass (`Exception`), which displays it. Therefore, our new exception could be thrown with

```java
throw new MyException("a message to specify the location of the error");
```

</div>

---

The binding of exceptions to handlers in Java is similar to that of C++.

- If an exception is thrown in the compound statement of a `try` construct, it is bound to the first handler (`catch` function) immediately following the `try` clause whose parameter is the same class as the thrown object, or an ancestor of it.
- If a matching handler is found, the `throw` is bound to it and it is executed.

***Rethrowing Exceptions***

Exceptions can be handled and then *rethrown* by including a `throw` statement without an operand at the end of the handler.

- The newly thrown exception will not be handled in the same `try` where it was originally thrown, so looping is not a concern.
- This rethrowing is usually done when some local action is useful, but further handling by an enclosing `try` clause or a `try` clause in the caller is necessary.
- A `throw` statement in a handler could also throw some exception other than the one that transferred control to this handler.

***Catch-All Exception Handlers***

To ensure that exceptions that can be thrown in a `try` clause are always handled in a method, a special handler can be written that matches all exceptions that are derived from `Exception` simply by defining the handler with an `Exception` type parameter, as in

```java
catch (Exception genericObject) {
    ...
}
```

- Because a class name always matches itself or any ancestor class, any class derived from `Exception` matches `Exception`.
- Of course, such an exception handler should always be placed at the end of the list of handlers, for it will block the use of any handler that follows it in the `try` construct in which it appears. This occurs because the search for a matching handler is sequential, and the search ends when a match is found.

## Other Design Choices

In the case of user-defined exceptions, the thrown object could include any number of data fields that might be useful in the handler.

***Get The Class Name***

As part of its reflection facilities, the Java run-time system stores the class name of every object in the program. The method `getClass` can be used to get an object that stores the class name, which itself can be gotten with the `getName` method.

<div class="alert-example">

So, we can retrieve the name of the class of the actual parameter from the `throw` statement that caused the handler’s execution. For the handler shown earlier, this is done with

```java
genericObject.getClass().getName()
```

</div>

***Get The Message***

In addition, the message associated with the parameter object, which is created by the constructor, can be gotten with

<div class="alert-example">

```java
genericObject.getMessage()
```

</div>

***Semantics of Java `throws`***

The `throws` clause of Java has the appearance and placement (in a program) that is similar to that of the `throw` specification of C++. However, the semantics of `throws` is somewhat different from that of the C++ `throw` clause.

The appearance of an exception class name in the `throws` clause of a Java method specifies that that exception class or any of its descendant exception classes can be thrown but not handled by the method.

<div class="alert-example">

When a method specifies that it can throw `IOException`, it means it can throw an `IOException` object or an object of any of its descendant classes, such as `EOFException`, and it does not handle the exception it throws.

</div>

- Exceptions of class `Error` and `RuntimeException` and their descendants are called **unchecked exceptions**.
- All other exceptions are called **checked exceptions**.

Unchecked exceptions are never a concern of the compiler. However, <mark>the compiler ensures that all checked exceptions a method can throw are either listed in its `throws` clause or handled in the method.</mark>

Note that checking this at compile time differs from C++, in which it is done at run time. The reason why exceptions of the classes `Error` and `RuntimeException` and their descendants are unchecked is that any method could throw them. A program can catch unchecked exceptions, but it is not required.

***Exception Handling in Method Overriding***

- As is the case with C++, a method cannot declare more exceptions in its `throws` clause than the method it overrides, though it may declare fewer.
- So if a method has no `throws` clause, neither can any method that overrides it.
- A method can throw any exception listed in its `throws` clause, along with any of the descendant classes of those exceptions.

***Exception Propagation***

?> 因為 checked exceptions 的機制，方法必須處理因為呼叫其他方法而產生的例外，或是宣告會拋出該例外。

A method that does not directly throw a particular exception, but calls another method that could throw that exception, must list the exception in its `throws` clause.

<div class="alert-example">

This is the reason the `buildDist` method (in the example in the next subsection), which uses the `readLine` method, must specify `IOException` in the `throws` clause of its header.

</div>

- A method that does not include a `throws` clause *cannot* propagate any checked exception.
- Recall that in C++, a function without a `throw` clause can throw *any* exception.

***Three Ways to Handle Exceptions***

A method that calls a method that lists a particular checked exception in its `throws` clause has three alternatives for dealing with that exception:

- First, it can catch the exception and handle it.
- Second, it can catch the exception and throw an exception that is listed in its own `throws` clause.
- Third, it could declare the exception in its own `throws` clause and not handle it, which effectively propagates the exception to an enclosing `try` clause, if there is one, or to the method’s caller, if there is no enclosing `try` clause.

---

There are no default exception handlers, and it is not possible to disable exceptions. Continuation in Java is exactly as in C++.

## An Example

Following is the Java program with the capabilities of the C++ program in Section 14.2.5:

```java
// Grade Distribution
// Input:   A list of integer values that represent
//          grades, followed by a negative number
// Output:  A distribution of grades, as a percentage for
//          each of the categories 0-9, 10-19, ..., 90-100.
import java.io.*;

// The exception definition to deal with the end of data
class NegativeInputException extends Exception {
    public NegativeInputException() {
        System.out.println("End of input data reached");
    }
}

class GradeDist {
    int newGrade, index, limit_1, limit_2;
    int[] freq = {0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0};

    void buildDist() throws IOException {
        BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(System.in));
        try {
            while (true) {
                System.out.println("Please input a grade");
                newGrade = Integer.parseInt(in.readLine());
                if (newGrade < 0) {
                    throw new NegativeInputException();
                }
                index = newGrade / 10;
                try {
                    freq[index]++;
                } catch(ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException e) {
                    if (newGrade == 100) {
                        freq [9]++;
                    } else {
                        System.out.println("Error - new grade: "
                            + newGrade + " is out of range");
                    }
                }
            }
        } catch(NegativeInputException e) {
            System.out.println ("\nLimits Frequency\n");
            for (index = 0; index < 10; index++) {
                limit_1 = 10 * index;
                limit_2 = limit_1 + 9;
                if (index == 9) {
                    limit_2 = 100;
                }
                System.out.println("" + limit_1 + "-"
                    + limit_2 + ": " + freq[index]);
            }
        }
    }
    
    public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
        GradeDist gradeDist = new GradeDist();
        gradeDist.buildDist();
    }
}
```

```input
15
25
120
-1
```

```output
Please input a grade
Please input a grade
Please input a grade
Error - new grade: 120 is out of range
Please input a grade
End of input data reached

Limits Frequency

0-9: 0
10-19: 1
20-29: 1
30-39: 0
40-49: 0
50-59: 0
60-69: 0
70-79: 0
80-89: 0
90-100: 0
```

- The exception for a negative input, `NegativeInputException`, is defined in the program. Its constructor displays a message when an object of the class is created. Its handler produces the output of the method.
- `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` is a predefined unchecked exception that is thrown by the Java run-time system.

In both of these cases, the handler does not include an object name in its parameter. In neither case would a name serve any purpose. Although all handlers get objects as parameters, they often are not useful.

## The finally Clause

There are some situations in which a process must be executed regardless of whether a `try` clause throws an exception or the exception is handled in the method.

<div class="alert-example">

- One example of such a situation is a file that must be closed.
- Another is if the method has some external resource that must be freed in the method regardless of how the execution of the method terminates.

</div>

The `finally` clause was designed for these kinds of needs. A `finally` clause is placed at the end of the list of handlers just after a complete `try` construct. In general, the `try` construct and its `finally` clause appear as

```java
try {
    ...
} catch (...) {
    ...
}
... //** More handlers
finally {
    ...
}
```

The semantics of this construct is as follows:

- If the `try` clause throws no exceptions, the `finally` clause is executed before execution continues after the `try` construct.
- If the `try` clause throws an exception and it is caught by a following handler, the `finally` clause is executed after the handler completes its execution.
- If the `try` clause throws an exception but it is not caught by a handler following the `try` construct, the `finally` clause is executed before the exception is propagated.

A `try` construct with no exception handlers can be followed by a `finally` clause. This makes sense, of course, only if the compound statement has a `throw`, `break`, `continue`, or `return` statement. Its purpose in these cases is the same as when it is used with exception handling.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following:

```java
try {
    for (index = 0; index < 100; index++) {
        ...
        if (... ) {
            return;
        }
        ...
    }
} finally {
    ...
} //** end of try construct
```

The `finally` clause here will be executed, regardless of whether the `return` terminates the loop or it ends normally.

</div>

## Assertions

In the discussion of Plankalkül in Chapter 2, we mentioned that it included assertions. Assertions were added to Java in version 1.4. To use them, it is necessary to enable them by running the program with the `enableassertions` (or `ea`) flag, as in

```bash
java -enableassertions MyProgram
```

There are two possible forms of the `assert` statement:

```java
assert condition;
assert condition : expression;
```

- In the first case, the condition is tested when execution reaches the `assert`.
    - If the condition evaluates to true, nothing happens.
    - If it evaluates to false, the `AssertionError` exception is thrown.
- In the second case, the action is the same, except that the value of the `expression` is passed to the `AssertionError` constructor as a string and becomes debugging output.

***Defensive Programming***

The `assert` statement is used for defensive programming.

- A program may be written with many `assert` statements, which ensure that the program’s computation is on track to produce correct results.
- Many programmers put in such checks when they write a program, as an aid to debugging, even though the language they are using does not support assertions. When the program is sufficiently tested, these checks are removed.
- The advantage of `assert` statements, which have the same purpose, is that they can be disabled without removing them from the program. This saves the effort of removing them and also allows their use during subsequent program maintenance.

## Evaluation

The Java mechanisms for exception handling are an improvement over the C++ version on which they are based.

***Type Restrictions***

- A C++ program can throw any type defined in the program or by the system.
- In Java, only objects that are instances of `Throwable` or some class that descends from it can be thrown. This separates the objects that can be thrown from all of the other objects (and nonobjects) that inhabit a program. What significance can be attached to an exception that causes an `int` value to be thrown?

***Throws Clause***

- A C++ program unit that does not include a `throw` clause *can* throw any exception, which tells the reader nothing.
- A Java method that does not include a `throws` clause *cannot* throw any checked exception that it does not handle.

Therefore, the reader of a Java method knows from its header what exceptions it could throw but does not handle. A C++ compiler ignores `throw` clauses, but a Java compiler ensures that all exceptions that a method can throw are listed in its `throws` clause.

***Finally Clause***

The `finally` clause is a useful addition. It allows cleanup kinds of actions to take place regardless of how a compound statement terminated.

***Implicit Exception Throwing in Java***

- The Java run-time system implicitly throws a variety of predefined exceptions, such as for array indices out of range and dereferencing null references, which can be handled by any user program.
- A C++ program can handle only those exceptions that it explicitly throws (or that are thrown by library classes it uses).

***C# Exception Handling***

C# includes exception-handling constructs that are very much like those of Java, except that C# does not have a `throws` clause.
