# Exception Handling in Python and Ruby

This section provides brief overviews of the exception-handling mechanisms of Python and Ruby.

## Python

In Python, exceptions are objects. The base class of all exception classes is `BaseException`, from which the `Exception` class is derived.

- `BaseException` provides some services that are useful for all exception classes, but it is not usually directly subclassed.
- All predefined exception classes are derived from `Exception` and user-defined exception classes also are derived from it.

The most commonly used predefined subclasses of `Exception` are `ArithmeticError`,

- whose primary subclasses are `OverflowError`, `ZeroDivisionError`, and `FloatingPointError`, and `LookupError`, whose main subclasses are `IndexError` and `KeyError`.

***`try` Construct***

The statements for dealing with exceptions are similar to those of Java. The general form of a `try` construct is as follows:

```python
try:
    # The try block (the range of statements to be watched for exceptions)
except Exception1:
    # Handler for Exception1
except Exception2:
    # Handler for Exception2
...
else:
    # The else block (what to do when no exception is raised)
finally:
    # The finally block (what must be done regardless of what happened)
```

Both the `else` and the `finally` clauses are optional.

- One difference between handlers in Java and Python is that Python uses `except` to introduce them, rather than `catch`.
- The `else` clause is executed if no exception is raised in the `try` block.
- The `finally` clause has the same semantics as its counterpart in Java: If an exception is raised in the `try` block but is not handled by an immediately following handler, the exception is propagated after the `finally` block is executed.
- Because a handler handles its named exception, as well as all subclasses of that exception, a handler that names `Exception` handles all predefined and user-defined exceptions.

***Exception Propagation***

- An unhandled exception is propagated to progressively larger enclosing `try` constructs, searching for an appropriate handler.
- If none is found, the exception is propagated to the function’s caller, again searching for a handler in a nesting `try` construct.
- If no handler is found at any level, the default handler is called, which produces an error message and a stack trace and terminates the program.

***`raise` Statement***

The `raise` statement of Python is similar to the `throw` statement of Java and C++. The parameter for `raise` is the class name of the exception to be raised.

<div class="alert-example">

We could have the following:

```python
raise IndexError
```

This statement implicitly creates an instance of the named class, `IndexError`.

</div>

***No `throws` Clause***

Python does not have an equivalent to the `throws` clause of Java.

***Accessing the Exception Object***

An exception handler can gain access to the object of the raised exception
by providing an `as` clause and a variable name, as in the following:

```python
except Exception as ex_obj:
```

This is a universal handler, as it handles all exceptions. The exception object can be printed with a `print` statement in the handler, which produces the message of the object.

<div class="alert-example">

If the exception was `ZeroDivisionError`, the message would be `"division by zero"`.

</div>

***`assert` Statement***

Python’s `assert` statement provides a mechanism for making some exception handling optional. The general form of `assert` is as follows:

```python
assert test, data
```

In this statement:

- `test` is a Boolean flag or expression.
- `data` is the value that is sent to the constructor for the exception object to be raised.

The meaning of this statement, which optionally raises the `AssertionError` exception, can be described with the following code:

```python
if __debug__:
    if not test:
        raise AssertionError(data)
```

`__debug__` is a predefined flag that is set to `True` unless the `-0` flag is used on the command that runs the program. This allows one to disable all `assert` statements for a particular run of the program.

If an `AssertionError` exception is not handled by the program, like other unhandled exceptions, it terminates the program after using the default handler.

## Ruby

Like Python, Ruby exceptions are objects and it has a large collection of predefined exception classes.

All of the exceptions that are handled by application programs are either objects of the `StandardError` class or a class that descends from it.

`StandardError` is derived from `Exception`, which provides two useful methods to all its descendants.

- `message`: returns the human-readable error message.
- `backtrace`: returns a stack trace starting from the method where the exception was raised.

Some of the predefined subclasses of `StandardError` are `ArgumentError`, `IndexError`, `IOError`, and `ZeroDivisionError`.

***Raising Exceptions***

Exceptions are explicitly raised with the `raise` method.

`raise` is often called with a string parameter. In this case, it raises a new `RuntimeError` object with the string as its message.

<div class="alert-example">

We could have the following:

```ruby
raise "bad parameter" if count == 0
```

</div>

`raise` could also have two parameters,

- the first of which would be an object of an exception class. The `exception` method of this object is called and the returned `Exception` object is raised.
- In this case, the second parameter would be the string message to be displayed.

<div class="alert-example">

We could have the following:

```ruby
raise TypeError, "Float parameter expected" if not param.is_a? Float
```

</div>

***Exception Handlers***

An exception handler is specified with a `rescue` clause, which is attached to a statement. To attach an exception handler to a segment of code, the code is placed in a `begin-end` block. The `rescue` clause is placed in the block after the code of the block. In general, this appears as in the following:

```ruby
begin
    # The sequence of statements in the block
rescue
    # The handler
end
```

A `begin-end` block can include an `else` clause and/or an `ensure` clause.

- The `else` clause is exactly like that of Python.
- The `ensure` clause is exactly like a `finally` clause.

A method can act as a container for exception handling in place of a `begin-end` block.

***`retry` Statement***

In a clear departure from most other languages, Ruby allows a segment of code that raised an exception to be *rerun* after the exception is handled. This is specified with a `retry` statement at the end of the handler.
