# Introduction to Event Handling

Event handling is similar to exception handling. In both cases, the handlers are implicitly called by the occurrence of something, either an exception or an event.

- While exceptions can be raised either explicitly by user code or implicitly by hardware or a software interpreter,
- events are created by *external actions*, such as user interactions through a graphical user interface (GUI).

In this section, the fundamentals of event handling, which are less complex than those of exception handling, are introduced.

***Conventional vs. Event-Driven Programming***

- In conventional (non-event-driven) programming, the program code itself specifies the order in which that code is executed, although the order is usually affected by the program’s input data.
- In event-driven programming, parts of the program are executed at completely unpredictable times, often triggered by user interactions with the executing program.

***Event Handling in GUIs***

The particular kind of event handling discussed in this chapter is related to GUIs. Therefore, most of the events are caused by user interactions through graphical objects or components, often called *widgets*.

- The most common widgets are buttons.
- Implementing reactions to user interactions with GUI components is the most common form of event handling.

***Events and Event Handlers***

An **event** is a notification that something specific has occurred, such as a mouse click on a graphical button. Strictly speaking, <mark>an event is an object that is implicitly created by the run-time system in response to a user action</mark>, at least in the context in which event handling is being discussed here.

An **event handler** is a segment of code that is executed in response to the appearance of an event. Event handlers enable a program to be responsive to user actions.

***Applications of Event-Driven Programming***

Although event-driven programming was being used long before GUIs appeared, it has become a widely used programming methodology only in response to the popularity of these interfaces.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the GUIs presented to users of Web browsers.

Many Web documents presented to browser users are now dynamic. Such a document may present an order form to the user, who chooses the merchandise by clicking buttons. The required internal computations associated with these button clicks are performed by event handlers that react to the click events.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Another common use of event handlers is to check for simple errors and omissions in the elements of a form, either when they are changed or when the form is submitted to the Web server for processing.

Using event handling on the browser to check the validity of form data saves the time of sending that data to the server, where their correctness then must be checked by a server-resident program or script before they can be processed.

This kind of event-driven programming is often done using a client-side scripting language, such as JavaScript.

</div>
