# The Concept of Abstraction

An **abstraction** is a view or representation of an entity that includes only the most significant attributes.

In a general sense, abstraction allows one to collect instances of entities into groups in which their common attributes need not be considered.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose we define birds to be creatures with the following attributes: two wings, two legs, a tail, and feathers.

- Then, if we say a crow is a bird, a description of a crow need not include those attributes.
- The same is true for robins, sparrows, and yellow-bellied sapsuckers.

?> The common attributes in the descriptions of specific species of birds can be abstracted away, because all species have them.

</div>

Within a *particular* species, only the attributes that distinguish that species need be considered.

<div class="alert-example">

- Crows have the attributes of being black, being of a particular size, and being noisy. A description of a crow needs to provide those attributes, but not the others that are common to all birds.
- This results in significant simplification of the descriptions of members of the species.

A less abstract view of a species, that of a bird, may be considered when it is necessary to see a higher level of detail, rather than just the special attributes.

</div>

In the world of programming languages, abstraction is a weapon against the complexity of programming; its purpose is to simplify the programming process. It is an effective weapon because it allows programmers to focus on essential attributes, while ignoring subordinate attributes.

The two fundamental kinds of abstraction in contemporary programming languages are

- Process abstraction ([Chapter 9][])
- Data abstraction

[Chapter 9]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch11/11-1

The concept of **process abstraction** is among the oldest in programming language design. All subprograms are process abstractions because they provide a way for a program to specify a process, without providing the details of how it performs its task (at least in the calling program).

<div class="alert-example">

When a program needs to sort an array of numeric data of some type, it usually uses a subprogram for the sorting process. At the point where the sorting process is required, a statement such as

```c
// 此呼叫就是排序過程的抽象化。
// 隱藏實作細節：使用者不需要知道使用何種演算法。
sortInt(list, listLen)
```

is placed in the program. This call is an abstraction of the actual sorting process,
whose algorithm is not specified. The call is independent of the algorithm
implemented in the called subprogram.

- In the case of the subprogram `sortInt`, the only essential attributes are the name of the array to be sorted, the type of its elements, the array’s length, and the fact that the call to `sortInt` will result in the array being sorted.
- The particular algorithm that `sortInt` implements is an attribute that is not essential to the user.
- The user needs to see only the name and protocol of the sorting subprogram to be able to use it.

</div>

The widespread use of data abstraction necessarily followed that of process abstraction because an integral and essential part of every data abstraction is its operations, which are defined as process abstractions.
