# Introduction to Data Abstraction

Syntactically, an abstract data type is an enclosure that includes only the data representation of one specific data type and the subprograms that provide the operations for that type.

- Through *access controls*, <mark>unnecessary details of the type can be hidden from units outside the enclosure that use the type.</mark>
- Program units that use an abstract data type can declare variables of that type, even though the actual representation is hidden from them.

An instance of an abstract data type is called an **object**.

Object-oriented programming, which is described in [Chapter 12][], is an outgrowth of the use of data abstraction in software development, and data abstraction is one of its fundamental components.

[Chapter 12]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch12/12-1

## Floating-Point as an Abstract Data Type

A floating-point type provides the means to create variables to store floating-point data and also provides a set of arithmetic operations for manipulating objects of the type.

***Information Hiding***

Floating-point types in high-level languages employ a key concept in data abstraction: information hiding.

- The actual format of the floating-point data value in a memory cell is hidden from the user, and the only operations available are those provided by the language.
- The user is not allowed to create new operations on data of the type, except those that can be constructed using the built-in operations.
- The user cannot directly manipulate the parts of the actual representation of
values because that representation is hidden.

***Portability***

It is this feature that allows program portability between implementations of a particular language, even though the implementations may use different representations for particular data types.

<div class="alert-example">

Before the IEEE 754 standard floating-point representations appeared in the mid-1980s, there were several different representations being used by different computer architectures.

However, this variation did not prevent programs that used floating-point types from being portable among the various architectures.

</div>

## User-Defined Abstract Data Types

***Characteristics***

A user-defined abstract data type should provide the same characteristics as those of language-defined types, such as a floating-point type:

1. A type definition that allows program units to declare variables of the type but hides the representation of objects of the type;
2. A set of operations for manipulating objects of the type.

***Formally Definition***

We now formally define an abstract data type in the context of user-defined
types. An **abstract data type** is a data type that satisfies the following conditions:

- The representation of objects of the type is hidden from the program units that use the type, so the only direct operations possible on those objects are those provided in the type’s definition.
- The declarations of the type and the protocols of the operations on objects of the type, which provide the type’s interface, are contained in a single syntactic unit.
    - The type’s interface does not depend on the representation of the objects or the implementation of the operations.
    - Also, other program units are allowed to create variables of the defined type.

***Benefits of Information Hiding***

There are several benefits of information hiding.

1. One of these is increased reliability. Program units that use a specific abstract data type are called **clients** of that type.

    - Clients *cannot* manipulate the underlying representations of objects directly, either intentionally or by accident, thus increasing the integrity of such objects.
    - Objects can be changed only through the provided operations.

2. Another benefit of information hiding is it reduces the range of code and number of variables of which a programmer must be aware when writing or reading a part of the program.

    - The value of a particular variable can be changed only by code in a restricted range, making the code easier to understand and making it less challenging to find sources of incorrect changes.

3. Information hiding also makes name conflicts less likely, because the scopes of variables is smaller.

<div class="alert-example">

Finally, consider the following advantage of information hiding:

- Suppose that the original implementation of the *stack abstraction* uses a *linked list* representation.
- At a later time, because of memory management problems with that representation, the stack abstraction is changed to use a contiguous representation (one that implements a stack in an *array*).

?> Because data abstraction was used, this change can be made in the code that defines the stack type, but no changes will be required in any of the clients of the stack abstraction.

Of course, a change in protocol of any of the operations would require changes in the clients.

</div>

***Access Data Members***

Although the definition of an abstract data type specifies that data members of objects must be hidden from clients, many situations arise in which clients need to access these data members.

The common solution is to provide accessor methods, sometimes called **getters** and **setters**, that allow clients indirect access to the so-called hidden data—a better solution than simply making the data public, which would provide direct access.

There are three reasons why accessors are better:

- Read-only access can be provided by having a getter method but no corresponding setter method.
- Constraints can be included in setters. For example, if the data value should be restricted to a particular range, the setter can enforce that.
- The actual implementation of the data member can be changed without affecting the clients if getters and setters are the only access.

Both specifying data in an abstract data type to be public and providing accessor methods for that data are violations of the principles of abstract data types. Some believe these are simply loopholes that make an imperfect design usable.

<div class="alert-example">

As we will see in [Section 11-4 §4.2][],

- Ruby disallows making instance data public.
- However, Ruby also makes it very easy to create accessor functions.

It is a challenge for developers to design abstract data types in which all of the data is actually hidden.

[Section 11-4 §4.2]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch11/11-4?id=information-hiding-2

</div>

***Packaging Type and Operations***

The primary advantage of packaging the declarations of the type and its operations in a single syntactic unit is that

- it provides a method of organizing a program into logical units that can be *compiled separately*.
- In some cases, the implementation is included with the type declaration; in other cases, it is in a separate syntactic unit.

***Separation of Declaration and Implementation***

The advantage of having the implementation of the type and its operations in *different* syntactic units is that it increases the program’s *modularity* and it is a clear separation of design and implementation.

If both the declarations and the definitions of types and operations are in the *same* syntactic unit, there must be some means of hiding from client program units the parts of the unit that specify the definitions. (例如使用 `private`, `protected` 權限，從 client 那隱藏某些定義。)

## An Example

A stack is a widely applicable data structure that stores some number of data elements and only allows access to the data element at one of its ends, the top.

Suppose an abstract data type is to be constructed for a stack that has the following abstract operations:

| Operation            | Description                                                                                                  |
| :------------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| create(stack)        | Creates and possibly initializes a stack object                                                              |
| destroy(stack)       | Deallocates the storage for the stack                                                                        |
| empty(stack)         | A predicate (or Boolean) function that returns true<br />if the specified stack is empty and false otherwise |
| push(stack, element) | Pushes the specified element on the specified stack                                                          |
| pop(stack)           | Removes the top element from the specified stack                                                             |
| top(stack)           | Returns a copy of the top element from the specified stack                                                   |

Note that some implementations of abstract data types do not require the create and destroy operations.

- For example, simply defining a variable to be of an abstract data type may implicitly create the underlying data structure and initialize it.
- The storage for such a variable may be implicitly deallocated at the end of the variable’s scope.

A client of the stack type could have a code sequence such as the following:

```c
create(stk1);
push(stk1, color1);
push(stk1, color2);
temp = top(stk1);
```
