# Design Issues for Abstract Data Types

As stated earlier, the enclosure for an abstract data type defines a single data type and its operations. Many contemporary languages, including C++, Java, and C#, directly support abstract data types.

***Syntactic Unit***

A facility for defining abstract data types in a language must provide a syntactic unit that encloses

- the declaration of the type and
- the prototypes of the subprograms that implement the operations on objects of the type.

It must be possible to make these visible to clients of the abstraction. This allows clients to declare variables of the abstract type and manipulate their values.

- Although the type name must have external visibility, the type representation must be hidden.
- The type representation and the definitions of the subprograms that implement the operations may appear inside or outside this syntactic unit.

***Limited General Operations***

Few, if any, general built-in operations should be provided for objects of abstract data types, other than those provided with the type definition.

- There simply are not many operations that apply to a broad range of abstract data types.
- Among these are assignment and comparisons for equality and inequality.

    If the language does not allow users to overload assignment, the assignment operation must be included in the abstraction.

    Comparisons for equality and inequality should be predefined in the abstraction in some cases but not in others. For example, if the type is implemented as a pointer, equality may mean pointer equality, but the designer may want it to mean equality of the structures referenced by the pointers.

***Common Operations***

Some operations are required by many abstract data types, but because they are not universal, they often must be provided by the designer of the type. Among these are

- *Iterators* were discussed in [Chapter 8][].
- *Accessors* provide a form of access to data that is hidden from direct access by clients.
- *Constructors* are used to initialize parts of newly created objects.
- *Destructors* are often used to reclaim heap storage that may be used by parts of abstract data type objects in languages that do not do implicit storage reclamation.

[Chapter 8]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch08/8-3?id=iteration-based-on-data-structures

***Parameterization***

The first design issue is whether abstract data types can be parameterized.

For example, if the language supports parameterized abstract data types, one could design an abstract data type for some structure that could store elements of any type.

Parameterized abstract data types are discussed in Section 11.5.

***Access Controls***

The second design issue is what access controls are provided and how such controls are specified.

***Deciding Whether to Separate Type from Implementation***

Finally, the language designer must decide whether the specification of the type is physically separate from its implementation (or whether that is a developer choice).
