# Language Examples

In this section, we describe the support for data abstraction provided by C++, Java, C#, and Ruby

## Abstract Data Types in C++

C++, which was first released in 1985, was created by adding features to C. The first important additions were those to support object-oriented programming. Because one of the primary components of object-oriented programming is abstract data types, C++ obviously is required to support them.

C++ provides two constructs that are very similar to each other and directly support abstract data types:

- Class

    C++ classes are types. A C++ program unit that declares an instance of a class can also access any of the public entities in that class, but only through an instance of the class.

- Struct

    Because *structs* are most commonly used when *only data* is included, we do not discuss them further here.

### Encapsulation

- The data defined in a C++ class are called **data members**.
- The functions (methods) defined in a class are called **member functions**.

Data members and member functions appear in two categories: class and instance.

- *Class members* are associated with the class.
- *Instance members* are associated with the instances of the class.

  ?> In this chapter, only the instance members of a class are discussed.

    All of the instances of a class share a single set of member functions, but each instance has its own set of the class’s data members.

***Class Instances***

Class instances can be static, stack dynamic, or heap dynamic.

- If static or stack dynamic, they are referenced directly with value variables.

    Stack dynamic instances of classes are always created by the elaboration of an object declaration. Furthermore, the lifetime of such a class instance ends when the end of the scope of its declaration is reached.

- If heap dynamic, they are referenced through pointers.

    Heap dynamic class instances are created with the `new` operator and destroyed with the `delete` operator.

Both stack- and heap-dynamic classes can have pointer data members that reference heap dynamic data, so that even though a class instance is stack dynamic, it can include data members that reference heap dynamic data (生命週期可以超出作用域).

***Definition of Member Function***

A member function of a class can be defined in two distinct ways: The complete definition can appear in the class, or only in its header.

***Inline***

?> 節省呼叫開銷，提高效率。

When both the header and the body of a member function appear in the class definition, the member function is implicitly inlined. Recall that this means that its code is placed in the caller’s code, rather than requiring the usual call and return linkage.

The rationale for allowing member functions to be inlined was to *save function call overhead* in real-time applications, in which run-time efficiency is of utmost importance. The downside of inlining member functions is  that it clutters the class definition interface, resulting in a reduction in readability.

***Outside***

?> 分離標頭與定義，增加可讀性。

If only the header of a member function appears in the class definition, its complete definition appears outside the class and is *separately compiled*.

Placing member function definitions outside the class definition separates specification from implementation, a common goal of modern programming.

### Information Hiding

A C++ class can contain both hidden and visible entities (meaning they are either hidden from or visible to clients of the class).

- Entities that are to be hidden are placed in a `private` clause.
- Visible, or public, entities appear in a `public` clause. The `public` clause therefore describes the interface to class instances.
- There is also a third category of visibility, `protected`, which makes a member visible to subclasses, but not to clients.

### Constructors and Destructors

- Neither constructors nor destructors have return types, and neither use `return` statements.
- Both constructors and destructors can be explicitly called.

***Constructor***

C++ allows the user to include **constructor** functions in class definitions, which are used to initialize the data members of newly created objects.

- A constructor may also allocate the heap-dynamic data that are referenced by the pointer members of the new object.
- Constructors are implicitly called when an object of the class type is created.
- A constructor has the same name as the class whose objects it initializes.
- Constructors can be overloaded, but of course each constructor of a class must have a unique parameter profile.

***Destructor***

A C++ class can also include a function called a **destructor**, which is implicitly called when the lifetime of an instance of the class ends.

- As stated earlier, stack-dynamic class instances can contain pointer members that reference heap-dynamic data.
- The destructor function for such an instance can include a `delete` operator on the pointer members to deallocate the heap space they reference.
- Destructors are often used as a debugging aid, in which case they display or print the values of some or all of the object’s data members before those members are deallocated.
- The name of a destructor is the class’s name, preceded by a tilde (`~`).

### An Example

Our example of a C++ abstract data type is a stack:

```cpp
#include <iostream.h>
class Stack {
    private: //** These members are visible only to other
             //** members and friends (see Section 11.6.4)
        int *stackPtr;
        int maxLen;
        int topSub;

    public: //** These members are visible to clients
        //** A constructor
        Stack() {
            stackPtr = new int [100];
            maxLen = 99;
            topSub = -1;
        }

        //** A destructor
        ~Stack() {delete [] stackPtr;};

        void push(int number) {
            if (topSub == maxLen)
                cerr << "Error in push--stack is full\n";
            else
                stackPtr[++topSub] = number;
        }

        void pop() {
            if (empty())
                cerr << "Error in pop--stack is empty\n";
            else
                topSub--;
        }

        int top() {
            if (empty())
                cerr << "Error in top--stack is empty\n";
            else
                return (stackPtr[topSub]);
        }

        int empty() { return (topSub == -1); }
}
```

We discuss only a few aspects of this class definition, because it is not necessary to understand all of the details of the code.

Objects of the `Stack` class are stack dynamic but include a pointer that references heap-dynamic data.

- The `Stack` class has three data members—`stackPtr`, `maxLen`, and `topSub`—all of which are private.
- `stackPtr` is used to reference the heap-dynamic data, which is the array that implements the stack.
- The class also has four public member functions—`push`, `pop`, `top`, and `empty`—as well as a constructor and a destructor.

All of the member function definitions are included in this class, although they could have been externally defined. Because the bodies of the member functions are included, they are all implicitly inlined.

The constructor uses the `new` operator to allocate an array of 100 `int` elements from the heap. It also initializes `maxLen` and `topSub`.

The following is an example program that uses the Stack abstract data type:

```cpp
void main() {
    int topOne;
    Stack stk; //** Create an instance of the Stack class
    stk.push(42);
    stk.push(17);
    topOne = stk.top();
    stk.pop();
}
```

Following is a definition of the `Stack` class with only prototypes of the member functions.

- This code is stored in a header file with the `.h` file name extension.

```cpp
// Stack.h - the header file for the Stack class
#include <iostream.h>
class Stack {
    private:    //** These members are visible only to other
                //** members and friends (see Section 11.6.3)
        int *stackPtr;
        int maxLen;
        int topSub;

    public: //** These members are visible to clients
        Stack(); //** A constructor
        ~Stack(); //** A destructor
        void push(int);
        void pop();
        int top();
        int empty();
}
```

- The definitions of the member functions follow the class definition. These use the scope resolution operator, `::`, to indicate the class to which they belong.
- These definitions are stored in a code file with the file name extension `.cpp`.

```cpp
// Stack.cpp - the implementation file for the Stack class
#include <iostream.h>
#include "Stack.h"
using std::cout;

Stack::Stack() { //** A constructor
    stackPtr = new int [100];
    maxLen = 99;
    topSub = -1;
}

Stack::~Stack() {delete [] stackPtr;}; //** A destructor

void Stack::push(int number) {
    if (topSub == maxLen)
        cerr << "Error in push--stack is full\n";
    else
        stackPtr[++topSub] = number;
}

void Stack::pop() {
    if (topSub == -1)
        cerr << "Error in pop--stack is empty\n";
    else
        topSub--;
}

int Stack::top() {
    if (topSub == -1)
        cerr << "Error in top--stack is empty\n";
    else
        return (stackPtr[topSub]);
}

int Stack::empty() { return (topSub == -1); }
```

## Abstract Data Types in Java

Java support for abstract data types is similar to that of C++. There are, however, a few important differences.

- All objects are allocated from the heap and accessed through reference variables.
- Methods in Java must be defined completely in a class.
- A method body must appear with its corresponding method header. Therefore, a Java abstract data type is both declared and defined in a single syntactic unit.
- A Java compiler can inline any method that is not overridden.
- Definitions are hidden from clients by declaring them to be private.

***Implicit Garbage Collection***

One important advantage of Java’s classes over the classes of C++ is that it uses implicit garbage collection of all objects. This allows the programmer to ignore the issue of deallocation of objects and the clutter of deallocation code in the implementations of abstract data types.

***Access Modifier***

Rather than having private and public clauses in its class definitions, in Java access modifiers can be attached to method and variable definitions. If an instance variable or method does not have an access modifier, it has package access, which is discussed in Section 11.7.2.

### An Example

The following is a Java class definition for our stack example:

```java
class StackClass {
    private int [] stackRef;
    private int maxLen,
                topIndex;

    // A constructor
    public StackClass() {
        stackRef = new int [100];
        maxLen = 99;
        topIndex = -1;
    }

    public void push(int number) {
        if (topIndex == maxLen)
            System.out.println("Error in push–stack is full");
        else
            stackRef[++topIndex] = number;
    }

    public void pop() {
        if (empty())
            System.out.println("Error in pop–stack is empty");
        else
            --topIndex;
    }

    public int top() {
        if (empty()) {
            System.out.println("Error in top–stack is empty");
            return 9999;
        } else
            return (stackRef[topIndex]);
    }

    public boolean empty() { return (topIndex == -1); }
}
```

An example class that uses `StackClass` follows:

```java
public class TstStack {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        StackClass myStack = new StackClass();
        myStack.push(42);
        myStack.push(29);
        System.out.println("29 is: " + myStack.top());
        myStack.pop();
        System.out.println("42 is: " + myStack.top());
        myStack.pop();
        myStack.pop(); // Produces an error message
    }
}
```

One obvious difference between the Java and the C++ implementations of the stack is the lack of a destructor in the Java version, obviated by Java’s implicit garbage collection.

### Evaluation

Although different in some primarily cosmetic ways, Java’s support for abstract data types is similar to that of C++. Java clearly provides for what is necessary to design abstract data types.

## Abstract Data Types in C#

Recall that C# is based on both C++ and Java and that it also includes some new constructs.

- Like Java, all C# class instances are heap dynamic.
- *Default constructors*, which provide initial values for instance data, are predefined for all classes. These constructors provide typical initial values, such as 0 for `int` types and `false` for `boolean` types.
- A user can furnish one or more constructors for any class he or she defines. Such constructors can assign initial values to some or all of the instance data of the class.
- Any instance variable that is not initialized in a user-defined constructor is assigned a value by the default constructor.

Although C# allows destructors to be defined, because it uses *garbage collection* for most of its heap objects, destructors are rarely used.

### Encapsulation

C++ includes both classes and structs, which are nearly identical constructs. The only difference is that the default access modifier for class is `private`, whereas for structs it is `public`.

***Structs in C#***

C# also has structs, but they are very different from those of C++. In C#, structs are, in a sense, lightweight classes.

- They can have constructors, properties, methods, and data fields and can implement interfaces but do *not* support inheritance.
- One other important difference between structs and classes in C# is that structs are *value types*, as opposed to reference types.
- They are allocated on the run-time stack, rather than the heap.
- If they are passed as parameters, like other value types, by default they are passed by value.
- All C# value types, including all of its primitive types, are actually structs.
- Structs can be created by declaring them, like other predefined value types, such as `int` or `float`.
- They can also be created with the `new` operator, which calls a constructor to initialize them.

Structs are used in C# primarily to implement relatively small simple types that need never be base types for inheritance. They are also used when it is convenient for the objects of the type to be stack as opposed to heap allocated.

### Information Hiding

C# uses the `private` and `protected` access modifiers exactly as they are used in Java.

C# provides properties, which it inherited from Delphi, as a way of implementing getters and setters without requiring explicit method calls by the client. Properties provide implicit access to specific private instance data.

For example, consider the following simple class and client code:

```csharp
public class Weather {
    //** DegreeDays is a property
    public int DegreeDays {
        get {
            return degreeDays;
        }

        set {
            if(value < 0 || value > 30)
                Console.WriteLine( "Value is out of range: {0}", value);
            else
                degreeDays = value;
        }
    }
    private int degreeDays;
    ...
}

Weather w = new Weather();
int degreeDaysToday, oldDegreeDays;
w.DegreeDays = degreeDaysToday;
oldDegreeDays = w.DegreeDays;
```

In the class `Weather`, the property `DegreeDays` is defined.

- This property provides a getter method and a setter method for access to the private data member, `degreeDays`.
- In the client code following the class definition, `degreeDays` is treated as if it were a public-member variable, although access to it is available through the property only.

***Implicit Variable Value***

Notice the use of the implicit variable `value` in the setter method. This is the mechanism by which the new value of the property is referenced.

---

The stack example is not shown here in C#. The only difference between the Java version in Section 11.4.2.1 and the C# version is the output method calls and the use of `bool` instead of `boolean` for the return type of the `empty` method.

## Abstract Data Types in Ruby

Ruby provides support for abstract data types through its classes. In terms of capabilities, Ruby classes are similar to those in C++ and Java.

### Encapsulation

In Ruby, a class is defined in a compound statement opened with the `class` reserved word and closed with `end`.

- The names of instance variables have a special syntactic form, they must begin with at signs (`@`).
- Instance methods have the same syntax as functions in Ruby: They begin with the `def` reserved word and end with `end`.
- Class methods are distinguished from instance methods by having the class name appended to the beginning of their names with a period separator. For example, in a class named `Stack`, a class method’s name would begin with `Stack`.
- Constructors in Ruby are named `initialize`. Because the constructor cannot be overloaded, there only can be one per class.

***Adding Members Dynamically***

Classes in Ruby are dynamic in the sense that members can be added at any time. This is done by simply including additional class definitions that specify the new members. Moreover, even predefined classes of the language, such as `String`, can be extended.

<div class="alert-example">

For example, consider the following class definition:

```ruby
class myClass
    def meth1
        ...
    end
end
```

This class could be extended by adding a second method, `meth2`, with a second class definition:

```ruby
class myClass
    def meth2
        ...
    end
end
```

</div>

***Removing Methods***

Methods can also be removed from a class. This is done by providing another class definition in which the method to be removed is sent to the method `remove_method` as a parameter.

***Flexibility vs. Readability***

The *dynamic classes* of Ruby is another example of a language designer trading readability (and as a consequence, reliability) for flexibility.

- Allowing dynamic changes to classes clearly adds flexibility to the language, while harming readability.
- To determine the behavior of a class at a particular point in a program, one must find all of its definitions in the program and consider all of them.

### Information Hiding

***Data Method***

Access control for methods in Ruby is dynamic, so access violations are detected only during execution.

- The default method access is public, but it can also be protected or private.
- There are two ways to specify the access control, both of which use functions with the same names as the access levels, `private` and `public`.

  <div class="alert-example">

    One way is to call the appropriate function without parameters. This resets the default access for subsequently defined methods in the class. For example,

    ```ruby
    class MyClass
        # By default ALL methods are public.
        def meth1
            ...
        end
        ...

        private # Every instance method after private becomes a private method.
            def meth7
                ...
            end
            ...
    end # of class MyClass
    ```

  </div>

  <div class="alert-example">

    The alternative is to call the access control functions with the names of the specific methods as parameters. For example, the following is semantically equivalent to the previous class definition:

    ```ruby
    class MyClass
        def meth1
            ...
        end
        ...

        def meth7
            ...
        end

        private :meth7, ...
    end # of class MyClass
    ```

  </div>

***Data Members***

In Ruby, all data members of a class are private, and that cannot be changed. So, data members can be accessed only by the methods of the class, some of which may be accessor methods.

In Ruby, instance data that are accessible through accessor methods are called **attributes**.

<div class="alert-example">

For an instance variable named `@sum`, the getter and setter methods would be as follows:

```ruby
# getter
def sum
    @sum
end

# setter
def sum=(new_sum)
    @sum = new_sum
end
```

- Notice that getters are given the name of the instance variable minus the `@`.
- The names of setter methods are the same as those of the corresponding getters, except they have an equal sign (`=`) attached.

</div>

Getters and setters can be *implicitly generated* by the Ruby system by including calls to `attr_reader` and `attr_writer`, respectively, in the class definition. The parameters to these are the symbols of the attribute’s names, as is illustrated in the following:

```ruby
attr_reader :sum, :total
attr_writer :sum
```

### An Example

Following is the stack example written in Ruby:

This class defines a stack structure that can store objects of any type.

```ruby
# Stack.rb - defines and tests a stack of maximum length
#            100, implemented in an array
class StackClass

    # Constructor
    def initialize
        @stackRef = Array.new(100)
        @maxLen = 100
        @topIndex = -1
    end

    # push method
    def push(number)
        if @topIndex == @maxLen
            puts "Error in push - stack is full"
        else
            @topIndex = @topIndex + 1
            @stackRef[@topIndex] = number
        end
    end

    # pop method
    def pop
        if empty
            puts "Error in pop - stack is empty"
        else
            @topIndex = @topIndex - 1
        end
    end

    # top method
    def top
        if empty
            puts "Error in top - stack is empty"
        else
            @stackRef[@topIndex]
        end
    end

    # empty method
    def empty
        @topIndex == -1
    end
end
```

```ruby
# Test code for StackClass
myStack = StackClass.new
myStack.push(42)
myStack.push(29)
puts "Top element is (should be 29): #{myStack.top}"
myStack.pop
puts "Top element is (should be 42): #{myStack.top}"
myStack.pop
# The following pop should produce an
# error message - stack is empty
myStack.pop
```

Recall that the (*String interpolation*) notation `#{variable}` converts the value of the variable to a string, which is then inserted into the string in which it appears.

### Evaluation

Recall that in Ruby, everything is an object and arrays are actually arrays of references to objects. That clearly makes this stack more flexible than the similar examples in C++ and Java.

Furthermore, simply by passing the desired maximum length to the constructor, objects of this class could have any given maximum length. Of course, because arrays in Ruby have dynamic length, the class could be modified to implement stack objects that are not restricted to any length, except that imposed by the machine’s memory capacity.

Because the names of class and instance variables have different forms, Ruby has a slight readability advantage over the other languages discussed in this section.
