# Parameterized Abstract Data Types

It is often convenient to be able to parameterize abstract data types.

<div class="alert-example">

We should be able to design a stack abstract data type that can store any scalar type elements rather than be required to write a separate stack abstraction for every different scalar type.

- ?> Note that this is only an issue for static typed languages.

- In a dynamic typed language like Ruby, any stack implicitly can store any type elements.

    ```ruby
    stack = Array.new
    stack.push(5)           # 整數
    stack.push("hello")     # 字串
    stack.push([1, 2, 3])   # 陣列
    ```

    In fact, different elements of the stack could be of different types.

</div>

In the following three subsections, the capabilities of C++, Java 5.0, and C# 2005 to construct parameterized abstract data types are discussed.

## C++

<div class="alert-example">

To make the example C++ stack class of Section 11.4.1 generic in the *stack size*, only the constructor function needs to be changed, as in the following:

```cpp
Stack(int size) {
    stackPtr = new int [size];
    maxLen = size - 1;
    topSub = -1;
}
```

The declaration for a stack object now may appear as follows:

```cpp
Stack stk(150);
```

The class definition for `Stack` can include both constructors, so users can use the default-size stack or specify some other size.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The *element type* of the stack can be made generic by making the class a templated class. Then, the element type can be a template parameter.

The definition of the templated class for a stack type is as follows:

```cpp
#include <iostream.h>
template <typename Type> // Type is the template parameter
class Stack {
    private:
        Type *stackPtr;
        int maxLen;
        int topSub;
    public:
        // A constructor for 100 element stacks
        Stack() {
            stackPtr = new Type [100];
            maxLen = 99;
            topSub = -1;
        }
        // A constructor for a given number of elements
        Stack(int size) {
            stackPtr = new Type [size];
            maxLen = size - 1;
            topSub = -1;
        }
        ~Stack() {delete stackPtr;}; // A destructor
        void push(Type number) {
            if (topSub == maxLen)
                cout << "Error in push–stack is full\n";
            else
                stackPtr[++ topSub] = number;
        }
        void pop() {
            if (empty())
                cout << "Error in pop–stack is empty\n";
            else
                topSub --;
        }
        Type top() {
            if (empty())
                cerr << "Error in top--stack is empty\n";
            else
                return (stackPtr[topSub]);
        }
        int empty() { return (topSub == -1); }
}
```

?> C++ templated classes are instantiated to become typed classes at compile time.

For example, an instance of the templated `Stack` class, as well as an instance of the typed class, can be created with the following declaration:

```cpp
Stack<int> myIntStack; // 編譯器會在編譯時產生針對 int 型別的 Stack 類別
```

However, if an instance of the templated `Stack` class has already been created for the `int` type, the typed class need not be created.

</div>

## Java 5.0

Java 5.0 supports a form of parameterized abstract data types in which the generic parameters must be classes. Recall that these were briefly discussed in Chapter 9.

The most common generic types are *collection types*,

- such as `LinkedList` and `ArrayList`, which were in the Java class library before support for generics was added.
- The original collection types stored `Object` class instances, so they could store any objects (but not primitive types). Therefore, the collection types have always been able to store multiple types (as long as they are classes).

There were three issues with this:

- First, every time an object was removed from the collection, it had to be cast to the appropriate type.
- Second, there was no error checking when elements were added to the collection. This meant that once the collection was created, objects of any class could be added to the collection, even if the collection was meant to store only `Integer` objects.
- Third, the collection types could not store primitive types. So, to store `int` values in an `ArrayList`, the value first had to be put in an `Integer` class instance.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following code:

```java
//* Create an ArrayList object
ArrayList myArray = new ArrayList();
//* Create an element
myArray.add(0, new Integer(47));
//* Get first object
Integer myInt = (Integer)myArray.get(0);
```

</div>

In Java 5.0, the collection classes, the most commonly used of which is `ArrayList`, became a generic class.

- Such classes are instantiated by calling `new` on the class constructor and
- passing it the generic parameter in pointed brackets (`<>`).

<div class="alert-example">

The `ArrayList` class can be instantiated to store `Integer` objects with the following statement:

```java
ArrayList<Integer> myArray = new ArrayList<Integer>();
```

This new class overcomes two of the problems with pre-Java 5.0 collections.

- Only `Integer` objects can be put into the `myArray` collection.
- Furthermore, there is no need to cast an object being removed from the collection.

</div>

Java 5.0 also includes generic collections for linked-lists, queues, and sets. Users also can define generic classes in Java 5.0.

<div class="alert-example">

We could have the following:

```java
public class MyClass<T> {
    ...
}
```

This class could be instantiated with the following:

```java
MyClass<String> myString;
```

</div>

There are some drawbacks to these user-defined generic classes.

- For one thing, they cannot store primitives.
- Second, *the elements cannot be indexed*. Elements must be added to user-defined generic collections with the `add` method.

<div class="alert-example">

Next, we implement the generic stack example using an ArrayList.

- Note that the last element of an `ArrayList` is found using the `size` method, which returns the number of elements in the structure.
- Elements are deleted from the structure with the `remove` method. Following is the generic class:

```java
import java.util.*;
public class Stack2<T> {
    private ArrayList<T> stackRef;
    private int maxLen;
    // A constructor
    public Stack2() {
        stackRef = new ArrayList<T> ();
        maxLen = 99;
    }
    public void push(T newValue) {
        if (stackRef.size() == maxLen)
            System.out.println("Error in push–stack is full");
        else
            stackRef.add(newValue);
    }
    public void pop() {
        if (empty())
            System.out.println("Error in pop–stack is empty");
        else
            stackRef.remove(stackRef.size() - 1);
    }
    public T top() {
        if empty() {
            System.out.println("Error in top–stack is empty");
            return null;
        } else
            return (stackRef.get(stackRef.size() - 1));
    }
    public boolean empty() { return (stackRef.isEmpty()); }
```

This class could be instantiated for the `String` type with the following:

```java
Stack2<String> myStack = new Stack2<String>();
```

</div>

Recall from [Section 9-10][], that Java 5.0 supports wildcard classes.

[Section 9-10]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch09/9-10?id=generic-methods-in-java-50

`Collection<?>` is a wildcard class for all collection classes.

- This allows a method to be written that can accept any collection type as a parameter.
- Because a collection can itself be generic, the `Collection<?>` class is in a sense a generic of a generic class.

Some care must be taken with objects of the wildcard type.

<div class="alert-example">

Because the components of a particular object of this type have a type, other type objects cannot be added to the collection. For example, consider

```java
Collection<?> c = new ArrayList<String>();
```

It would be illegal to use the `add` method to put something into this collection
unless its type were `String`.

</div>

A generic class can easily be defined in Java 5.0 that will work only for a restricted set of types.

<div class="alert-example">

A class can declare a variable of the generic type and call a method such as `compareTo` through that variable. If the class is instantiated for a type that does not include a `compareTo` method, the class cannot be used.

To prevent a generic class from being instantiated for a type that does not support `compareTo`, it could be defined with the following generic parameter:

```java
<T extends Comparable>
```

- `Comparable` is the interface in which `compareTo` is declared.
- If this generic type is used on a class definition, the class cannot be instantiated for any type that does not implement `Comparable`.

The choice of the reserved word `extends` seems odd here, but its use is related to the concept of a subtype. Apparently, the designers of Java did not want to add another more connotative reserved word to the language.

</div>

## C# 2005

As was the case with Java, the first version of C# defined collection classes that stored objects of any class. These were `ArrayList`, `Stack`, and `Queue`. These classes had the same problems as the collection classes of pre-Java 5.0.

Generic classes were added to C# in its 2005 version. The five predefined generic collections are `Array`, `List`, `Stack`, `Queue`, and `Dictionary` (the `Dictionary` class implements hashes). Exactly as in Java 5.0, these classes eliminate the problems of allowing mixed types in collections and requiring casts when objects are removed from the collections.

As with Java 5.0, users can define generic classes in C# 2005. One capability of the user-defined C# generic collections is that any of them can be defined to *allow* its elements to be indexed (*accessed through subscripting*). Although the indexes are usually integers, an alternative is to use strings as indexes.

One capability that Java 5.0 provides that C# 2005 does *not* is wildcard classes.
