# Encapsulation Constructs

The first five sections of this chapter discussed abstract data types, which are minimal encapsulations.

?> This section describes the multiple-type encapsulations that are needed for larger programs.

## Introduction

When the size of a program reaches beyond a *few thousand lines*, two practical problems become evident.

- From the programmer’s point of view, having such a program appear as a single collection of subprograms or abstract data type definitions does not impose an adequate level of organization on the program to keep it intellectually manageable.
- The second practical problem for larger programs is *recompilation*.
    - For relatively small programs, recompiling the whole program after each modification is not costly.
    - But for large programs, the cost of recompilation is significant.
    - So, there is an obvious need to find ways to avoid recompilation of the parts of a program that are not affected by a change.

***Libraries***

The obvious solution to both of these problems is to organize programs into collections of logically related code and data, each of which can be compiled without recompilation of the rest of the program. An **encapsulation** is such a collection.

- Encapsulations are often placed in libraries and made available for reuse in programs other than those for which they were written.

***Limitations of Nested Subprograms***

In languages that allow nested subprograms, programs can be organized by nesting subprogram definitions inside the logically larger subprograms that use them. This can be done in Python and Ruby.

- As discussed in Chapter 5, however, this method of organizing programs, which uses static scoping, is far from ideal.
- Therefore, even in languages that allow nested subprograms, <mark>they are not used as a primary organizing encapsulation construct.</mark>

## Encapsulation in C

C does not provide complete support for abstract data types, although both abstract data types and multiple-type encapsulations can be simulated.

In C, a collection of related functions and data definitions can be placed in a file, which can be independently compiled.

- Such a file, which acts as a library, has an implementation of its entities.
- The interface to such a file, including data, type, and function declarations, is placed in a separate file called a **header file**.
- Type representations can be hidden by declaring them in the header file as pointers to struct types. The complete definitions of such struct types need only appear in the implementation file.

The header file, in source form, and the compiled version of the implementation file are furnished to clients.

- When such a library is used, the header file is included in the client code, using an `#include` preprocessor specification, so that references to functions and data in the client code can be type checked.
- The `#include` specification also documents the fact that the client program depends on the library implementation file.

?> This approach effectively separates the specification and implementation of an encapsulation.

<div class="alert-attention">

?> Although these encapsulations work, they create some *insecurities*.

For example, a user could simply *cut and paste* the definitions from the header file into the client program, rather than using `#include`. This would work, because `#include` simply copies the contents of its operand file into the file in which the `#include` appears.

However, there are two problems with this approach.

- First, the documentation of the dependence of the client program on the library (and its header file) is lost.
- Second, suppose a user copies the header file into his or her program. Then the author of the library changes both the header and the implementation files. Following this, the user uses the new implementation file with the old header.

    For example, a variable `x` could have been defined to be `int` type in the old header file, which the client code still uses, although the implementation code has been recompiled with the new header file, which defines `x` to be `float`. So, the implementation code was compiled with `x` as an `int` but the client code was compiled with `x` as a `float`. The linker does not detect this error.

Thus, it is the user’s responsibility to ensure that both the header and implementation files are up-to-date. This is often done with a `make` utility.

</div>

<div class="alert-attention">

One other drawback of this approach is the inherent problems of pointers and the potential confusion with assignment and comparisons of pointers.

</div>

## Encapsulation in C++

C++ provides two different kinds of encapsulation:

- Header and implementation files can be defined as in C.
- Class headers and definitions can be defined.

Because of the complex interplay of C++ templates and separate compilation, the header files of C++ template libraries often include complete definitions of resources, rather than just data declarations and subprogram protocols; this is due in part to the use of the C linker for C++ programs.

When non-templated classes are used for encapsulations, the class header file has only the prototypes of the member functions, with the function definitions provided outside the class in a code file, as in the last example in [Section 11.4.1.4][]. This clearly separates interface from implementation.

[Section 11.4.1.4]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch11/11-4?id=an-example

***Friend Function***

One language design problem that results from having classes but no generalized encapsulation construct is that sometimes when operations are defined that use two different classes of objects, the operation does not naturally belong in either class.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose we have an abstract data type for matrices and one for vectors and need a multiplication operation between a vector and a matrix.

- The multiplication code must have *access to the data members of both* the vector and the matrix classes, but neither of those classes is the natural home for the code.
- Furthermore, regardless of which is chosen, access to the members of the other is a problem.

In C++, these kinds of situations can be handled by allowing nonmember functions to be “friends” of a class. Friend functions have access to the private entities of the class where they are declared to be friends.

- For the matrix/vector multiplication operation, one C++ solution is to define the operation outside both the matrix and the vector classes but define it to be a friend of both.

The following skeletal code illustrates this scenario:

```cpp
class Matrix; //** A class declaration
class Vector {
    friend Vector multiply(const Matrix&, const Vector&);
    ...
};
class Matrix { //** The class definition
    friend Vector multiply(const Matrix&, const Vector&);
    ...
};
//** The function that uses both Matrix and Vector objects
Vector multiply(const Matrix& m1, const Vector& v1) {
    ...
}
```

</div>

***Friend Class***

In addition to functions, whole classes can be defined to be friends of a class; then all the private members of the class are visible to all of the members of the friend class.

## C# Assemblies

C# includes a larger encapsulation construct than a class. The construct is the one used by all of the .NET programming languages: the assembly.

- Assemblies are built by .NET compilers.
- A .NET application consists of one or more assemblies.
- An **assembly** is a file that appears to application programs to be a single dynamic link library (`.dll`) or an executable (`.exe`).
- An assembly defines a module, which can be separately developed.
- An assembly includes several different components. One of the primary components of an assembly is its programming code, which is in an intermediate language, having been compiled from its source language.

In the .NET world, the assembly is the basic unit of deployment of software. Assemblies can be

- private, in which case they are available to just one application.
- public, which means any application can use them.

***Common Intermediate Language***

In .NET, the intermediate language is named Common Intermediate Language (CIL).

- It is used by all .NET languages. Because its code is in CIL, an assembly can be used on any architecture, device, or operating system.
- When executed, the CIL is just-in-time compiled to native code for the architecture on which it is resident.

***Metadata and References***

In addition to the CIL code,

- a .NET assembly includes *metadata* that describes every class it defines, as well as all external classes it uses.
- An assembly also includes a list of all *assemblies referenced* in the assembly and an assembly version number.

***Access Modifier***

As mentioned previously, C# has an access modifier, `internal`. An `internal` member of a class is visible to all classes in the assembly in which it appears.

***Java Archive (JAR)***

Java has a file structure that is similar to an assembly called a Java Archive (JAR). It is also used for deployment of Java software systems. JARs are built with the Java utility `jar`, rather than a compiler.
