# Naming Encapsulations

We have considered encapsulations to be syntactic containers for logically related software resources—in particular, abstract data types.

- The purpose of these encapsulations is to provide a way to organize programs into logical units for compilation.
- This allows parts of programs to be recompiled after isolated changes.

---

?> There is another kind of encapsulation that is necessary for constructing large programs: a **naming encapsulation**.

A large program is usually written by many developers, working somewhat independently, perhaps even in different geographic locations. This requires the logical units of the program to be independent, while still able to work together.

It also creates a naming problem:

- How can independently working developers create names for their variables, methods, and classes without accidentally using names already in use by some other programmer developing a different part of the same software system?

***Naming Libraries***

Libraries are the origin of the same kind of naming problems.

- Over the past two decades, large software systems have become progressively more dependent on libraries of supporting software.
- Nearly all software written in contemporary programming languages requires the use of large and complex standard libraries, in addition to application-specific libraries.
- This widespread use of multiple libraries has necessitated new mechanisms for managing names.

<div class="alert-example">

When a developer adds new names to an existing library or creates a new library, he or she must not use a new name that conflicts with a name already defined in a client’s application program or in some other library the program uses.

Without some language processor assistance, this is virtually impossible, because there is no convenient way for the library author to know what names a client’s program uses or what names are defined by the other libraries the client program might use.

</div>

?> Naming encapsulations define name scopes that assist in avoiding these name conflicts.

- Each library can create its own naming encapsulation to prevent its names from conflicting with the names defined in other libraries or in client code.
- Each logical part of a software system can create a naming encapsulation with the same purpose.

Naming encapsulations are logical encapsulations, in the sense that they need not be physically contiguous. Several different collections of code can be placed in the same namespace, even though they are stored in different places.

In the following sections, we briefly describe the uses of naming encapsulations in C++, Java, and Ruby.

## C++ Namespaces

C++ includes a specification, `namespace`, that helps programs manage the problem of global namespaces. One can place each library in its own namespace and qualify the names in the program with the name of the namespace when the names are used outside that namespace.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose there is an abstract data type header file that implements stacks.

If there is concern that some other library file may define a name that is used in the stack abstract data type, the file that defines the stack could be placed in its own namespace.

This is done by placing all of the declarations for the stack in a namespace block, as in the following:

```cpp
namespace myStackSpace {
    // Stack declarations
}
```

The implementation file for the stack abstract data type could reference the names declared in the header file with the scope resolution operator, `::`, as in

```cpp
myStackSpace::topSub
```

The implementation file could also appear in a namespace block specification identical to the one used on the header file, which would make all of the names declared in the header file directly visible.

```cpp
namespace myStackSpace {
    // Implementation of stack
}
```

This is definitely simpler, but slightly less readable, because it is less obvious where a specific name in the implementation file is declared.

</div>

Client code can gain access to the names in the namespace of the header file of a library in three different ways.

- One way is to qualify the names from the library with the name of the namespace.

  <div class="alert-example">

    A reference to the variable `topSub` could appear as follows:

    ```cpp
    myStackSpace::topSub
    ```

    This is exactly the way the implementation code could reference it if the implementation file was not in the same namespace.

  </div>

- The other two approaches use the `using` directive.

  <div class="alert-example">

    This directive can be used to qualify individual names from a namespace, as with

    ```cpp
    using myStackSpace::topSub;
    ```

    which makes `topSub` visible, but not any other names from the `myStackSpace` namespace.

  </div>

    The `using` directive also can be used to qualify all of the names from a namespace, as in the following:

  <div class="alert-example">

    ```cpp
    using namespace myStackSpace;
    ```

    Code that includes this directive can directly access the names defined in the
    namespace, as in

    ```cpp
    p = topSub;
    ```

  </div>

Be aware that namespaces are a complicated feature of C++, and we have introduced only the simplest part of the story here.

C# includes namespaces that are much like those of C++.

## Java Packages

Java includes a naming encapsulation construct: the package.

Packages can contain more than one type definition, and the types in a package are partial friends of one another.

- *Partial* here means that the entities defined in a type in a package that either are `public` or `protected` (see Chapter 12) or have no access specifier are visible to all other types in the package.

Entities without access modifiers are said to have **package scope**, because they are visible throughout the package.

- Java therefore has less need for explicit friend declarations and does not include the friend functions or friend classes of C++.

<div class="alert-example">

The resources defined in a file are specified to be in a particular package with a package declaration, as in

```java
package stkpkg;
```

- The package declaration must appear as the first line of the file.
- The resources of every file that does not include a package declaration are implicitly placed in the same unnamed package.

</div>

The clients of a package can reference the types defined in the package using fully qualified names.

<div class="alert-example">

- If the package `stkpkg` has a class named `myStack`, that class can be referenced in a client of `stkpkg` as `stkpkg.myStack`.
- Likewise, a variable in the `myStack` object named `topSub` could be referenced as `stkpkg.myStack.topSub`.

</div>

Because this approach can quickly become cumbersome when packages are nested, Java provides the import declaration, which allows shorter references to type names defined in a package.

<div class="alert-example">

Suppose the client includes the following:

```java.
import stkpkg.myStack;
```

Now, the class `myStack` can be referenced by just its name.

To be able to access all of the type names in the package, an asterisk (`*`) can be used on the import statement in place of the type name.

For example, if we wanted to import all of the types in `stkpkg`, we could use the following:

```java
import stkpkg.*;
```

</div>

Note that Java’s `import`

- is only an abbreviation mechanism.
- No otherwise hidden external resources are made available with `import`.

In fact, in Java nothing is implicitly hidden if it can be found by the compiler or class loader (using the package name and the `CLASSPATH` environment variable).

Java’s `import` documents the dependencies of the package in which it appears on the packages named in the `import`. These dependencies are less obvious when `import` is not used.

## Ruby Modules

Ruby classes serve as namespace encapsulations, as do the classes of other languages that support object-oriented programming. Ruby has an additional naming encapsulation, called a **module**.

- Modules typically *define* collections of *methods* and *constants*.
- So, modules are convenient for encapsulating libraries of related methods and constants, whose names are in a separate namespace so there are no name conflicts with other names in a program that uses the module.

Modules are unlike classes in that they cannot be instantiated or subclassed and do not define variables. Methods that are defined in a module include the module’s name in their names.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following skeletal module definition:

```ruby
module MyStuff
    PI = 3.14159265
    def MyStuff.mymethod1(p1)
        ...
    end
    def MyStuff.mymethod2(p2)
        ...
    end
end
```

- Assuming the `MyStuff` module is stored in its own file, a program that wants to use the constant and methods of `MyStuff` must first gain access to the module.
- This is done with the require method, which takes the file name in the form of a string literal as a parameter.
- Then, the constants and methods of the module can be accessed through the module’s name.

Consider the following code that uses our example module, `MyStuff`, which is stored in the file named `myStuffMod`:

```ruby
require 'myStuffMod'

MyStuff.mymethod1(x)
```

</div>

Modules are further discussed in Chapter 12.
