# If-Else

The `if-else` statement is used to express decisions. Formally the syntax is

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\begin{algorithmic}
\State if (expression)
\State $\qquad$statement1
\State else
\State $\qquad$statement2
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

where the `else` part is optional.

The $\text{expression}$ is evaluated:

- If it is true (that is, if $\text{expression}$ has a non-zero value), $\text{statement_1}$ is executed.
- If it is false ($\text{expression}$ is zero) and if there is an `else` part, $\text{statement_2}$ is executed instead.

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.6.4.1 The if statement][]

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\begin{algorithmic}
\State if ( expression ) statement1
\State if ( expression ) statement1 else statement2
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

- In both forms, $\text{statement_1}$ is executed if the expression compares unequal to 0.
- In the else form, $\text{statement_2}$ is executed if the expression compares equal to 0.

If $\text{statement_1}$ is reached via a label, $\text{statement_2}$ is not executed.

[C89 &sect;3.6.4.1 The if statement]: https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html#3.6.4.1

</div>

Since an `if` tests the numeric value of an expression, certain coding shortcuts are possible. The most obvious is writing

```c
if (expression)
```

instead of

```c
if (expression != 0)
```

Sometimes this is natural and clear; at other times it can be cryptic.

***Ambiguity***

Because the `else` part of an `if-else` is optional, there is an ambiguity when an else if omitted from a nested `if` sequence. <mark>This is resolved by associating the `else` with the closest previous `else`-less `if`.</mark>

<div class="alert-note">

?> [C89 &sect;3.6.4.1 The if statement][]

An `else` is associated with the lexically immediately preceding `else`-less `if` that is in the same block (but not in an enclosed block).

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

```c
if (n > 0)
    if (a > b)
        z = a;
    else
        z = b;
```

the `else` goes to the inner `if`, as we have shown by indentation. If that isn't what you want, braces must be used to force the proper association:

```c
if (n > 0) {
    if (a > b)
        z = a;
} else
    z = b;
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The ambiguity is especially pernicious in situations like this:

```c
if (n > 0)
    for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
        if (s[i] > 0) {
            printf("...");
            return i;
        }
else /* WRONG */
    printf("error -- n is negative\n");
```

The indentation shows unequivocally what you want, but the compiler doesn't get the message, and associates the `else` with the inner `if`. This kind of bug can be hard to find; it's a good idea to use braces when there are nested `if`s.

</div>

---

By the way, notice that there is a semicolon after `z = a` in

```c
if (a > b)
    z = a;
else
    z = b;
```

This is because grammatically, a statement follows the `if`, and an expression statement like `z = a;` is always terminated by a semicolon.
