# Goto and Labels

## Goto

C provides the infinitely-abusable `goto` statement, and labels to branch to. <mark>Formally, the `goto` statement is never necessary, and in practice it is almost always easy to write code without it.</mark> We have not used `goto` in this book.

Nevertheless, there are a few situations where `goto`s may find a place.

<div class="alert-example">

The most common is to abandon processing in some deeply nested structure, such as breaking out of two or more loops at once. The `break` statement cannot be used directly since it only exits from the innermost loop. Thus:

```c
    for ( ... ) {
        for ( ... ) {
            ...
            if (disaster) {
                goto error;
            }
        }
    }
    ...
error:
    /* clean up the mess */
```

This organization is handy if the error-handling code is non-trivial, and if errors can occur in several places.

</div>

## Labels

A label has the same form as a variable name, and is followed by a colon (`:`). It can be attached to any statement in the same function as the `goto`. <mark>The scope of a label is the entire function.</mark>

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the problem of determining whether two arrays `a` and `b` have an element in common. One possibility is

```c
    for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
        for (j = 0; j < m; j++) {
            if (a[i] == b[j]) {
                goto found;
            }
        }
    }
    /* didn't find any common element */
    ...
found:
    /* got one: a[i] == b[j] */
    ...
```

</div>

***Code Without `goto`***

Code involving a `goto` can always be written without one, though perhaps at the price of some repeated tests or an extra variable.

<div class="alert-example">

The array search becomes

```c
found = 0;

for (i = 0; i < n && !found; i++) {
    for (j = 0; j < m && !found; j++) {
        if (a[i] == b[j]) {
            found = 1;
        }
    }
}

if (found) {
    /* got one: a[i - 1] == b[j - 1] */
    ...
} else {
    /* didn't find any common element */
    ...
}
```

</div>

With a few exceptions like those cited here, code that relies on `goto` statements is generally harder to understand and to maintain than code without `goto`s. Although we are not dogmatic about the matter, it does seem that `goto` statements should be used rarely, if at all.
