# Generic Subprograms

Software reuse can be an important contributor to software productivity. One way to increase the reusability of software is to lessen the need to create different subprograms that implement the same algorithm on different types of data.

<div class="alert-example">

A programmer should not need to write four different sort subprograms to sort four arrays that differ only in element type.

</div>

A **polymorphic** subprogram takes parameters of different types on different activations.

***Ad Hoc Polymorphism***

Overloaded subprograms provide a particular kind of polymorphism called **ad hoc polymorphism**. Overloaded subprograms need not behave similarly.

```cpp
void print(int x);
void print(double x);
void print(const char* x);
```

***Subtype Polymorphism***

Languages that support object-oriented programming usually support **subtype polymorphism**, which means that a variable of type T can access any object of type T or any type derived from T.

<div class="alert-example">

```java
class Shape {
    void draw() { System.out.println("Drawing a shape"); }
}

class Circle extends Shape {
    @Override
    void draw() { System.out.println("Drawing a circle"); }
}

Shape s = new Circle(); // subtype polymorphism

s.draw(); // Output: "Drawing a circle"
```

</div>

***Polymorphism in Python and Ruby***

<div class="alert-example">

A more general kind of polymorphism is provided by the methods of Python and Ruby.

- Recall that variables in these languages do not have types, so formal parameters do not have types.
- Therefore, a method will work for any type of actual parameter, as long as the operators used on the formal parameters in the method are defined.

```python
def add(a, b):
    return a + b

print(add(1, 2))         # 整數相加，輸出: 3
print(add("foo", "bar")) # 字串連接，輸出: "foobar"
```

</div>

***Parametric Polymorphism (This Chapter)***

**Parametric polymorphism** is provided by a subprogram that takes generic parameters that are used in type expressions that describe the types of the parameters of the subprogram.

Different instantiations of such subprograms can be given different generic parameters, producing subprograms that take different types of parameters.

- Parametric definitions of subprograms all behave the same.
- Parametrically polymorphic subprograms are often called **generic subprograms**.

C++, Java 5.0+, C# 2005+, and F# provide a kind of compile-time parametric polymorphism.

## Generic Functions in C++

Generic functions in C++ have the descriptive name of template functions.

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{General Form of Template Function Definition}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{template} <template parameters>
\state —a function definition that may include the template parameters

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

A template parameter (there must be at least one) has one of the forms

```algorithm
\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Form of Template Parameter}
\begin{algorithmic}

\state \textbf{class} identifier
\state \textbf{typename} identifier

\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```

- The $\textbf{class}$ form is used for type names.
- The $\textbf{typename}$ form is used for passing a value to the template function. For example, it is sometimes convenient to pass an integer value for the size of an array in the template function.

A template can take another template, in practice often a template class that defines a user-defined generic type, as a parameter, but we do not consider that option here.

<div class="alert-example">

As an example of a template function, consider the following:

```cpp
template <class Type>
Type max(Type first, Type second) {
    return first > second ? first : second;
}
```

- where `Type` is the parameter that specifies the type of data on which the function will operate.
- This template function can be instantiated for any type for which the operator `>` is defined.

For example, if it were instantiated with `int` as the parameter, it would be

```cpp
int max(int first, int second) {
    return first > second ? first : second;
}
```

***Disadvantage of Macro***

Although this process could be defined as a macro, a macro would have the disadvantage of not operating correctly <mark>if the parameters were expressions with side effects.</mark> For example, suppose the macro were defined as

```cpp
#define max(a, b) ((a) > (b)) ? (a) : (b)
```

This definition is generic in the sense that it works for any numeric type. However, it does not always work correctly if called with a parameter that has a side effect, such as

```cpp
max(x++, y)
```

which produces

```cpp
((x++) > (y) ? (x++) : (y))
```

Whenever the value of x is greater than that of `y`, `x` will be incremented twice.

</div>

C++ template functions are instantiated implicitly either when the function is named in a call or when its address is taken with the `&` operator.

<div class="alert-example">

The example template function `max` would be *instantiated twice* by the following code segment—once for `int` type parameters and once for `char` type parameters:

```cpp
int a, b, c;
char d, e, f;
...
c = max(a, b);
f = max(d, e);
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The following is a C++ generic sort subprogram:

```cpp
template <class Type>
void generic_sort(Type list[], int len) {
    int top, bottom;
    Type temp;
    for (top = 0; top < len - 2; top++) {
        for (bottom = top + 1; bottom < len - 1; bottom++) {
            if (list[top] > list[bottom]) {
                temp = list[top];
                list[top] = list[bottom];
                list[bottom] = temp;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The following is an example instantiation of this template function:

```cpp
float flt_list[100];
...
generic_sort(flt_list, 100);
```

The templated functions of C++ are a kind of poor cousin to a subprogram in which the types of the formal parameters are dynamically bound to the types of the actual parameters in a call.

In this case, only a single copy of the code is needed, whereas with the C++ approach, a copy must be created at compile time for each different type that is required and the binding of subprogram calls to subprograms is static.

</div>

## Generic Methods in Java 5.0

Support for generic types and methods was added to Java in Java 5.0. The name of a generic class in Java 5.0 is specified by a name followed by one or more type variables delimited by pointed brackets. For example,

```java
generic_class<T>
```

where `T` is the type variable. Generic types are discussed in more detail in [Chapter 11][].

[Chapter 11]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch11/11-1

Java’s generic methods differ from the generic subprograms of C++ in several important ways.

- First, generic parameters must be classes (`Integer`, `Double`)—they cannot be primitive types(`int`, `double`).

    This requirement disallows a generic method that mimics our example in C++, in which the component types of arrays are generic and can be primitives. In Java, the components of arrays (as opposed to containers) cannot be generic.

- Second, although Java generic methods can be instantiated any number of times, only one copy of the code is built.

    - The internal version of a generic method, which is called a *raw method*, operates on `Object` class objects.
    - At the point where the generic value of a generic method is returned, the compiler inserts a cast to the proper type.

- Third, in Java, restrictions can be specified on the range of classes that can be passed to the generic method as generic parameters. Such restrictions are called **bounds**.

<div class="alert-example">

As an example of a generic Java 5.0 method, consider the following skeletal method definition:

```java
public static <T> T doIt(T[] list) {
    ...
}
```

This defines a method named `doIt` that takes an array of elements of a generic type. The name of the generic type is `T` and it must be an array. Following is an example call to `doIt`:

```java
doIt<string>(myList);
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Now, consider the following version of `doIt`, which has a bound on its generic parameter:

```java
public static <T extends Comparable> T doIt(T[] list) {
    ...
}
```

This defines a method that takes a generic array parameter whose elements are of a class that implements the `Comparable` interface. That is the restriction, or bound, on the generic parameter.

The reserved word `extends` seems to imply that the generic class subclasses the following class. In this context, however, `extends` has a different meaning. The expression `<T extends BoundingType>` specifies that `T` should be a “subtype” of the bounding type.

So, in this context, `extends` means

- If the bound is a class, the generic type extends the bounding class.
- If the bound is an interface, the generic type implements the bounding interface.

The bound ensures that the elements of any instantiation of the generic can be compared with the `Comparable` method, `compareTo`.

</div>

***Multiple Bounds***

If a generic method has two or more restrictions on its generic type, they are added to the `extends` clause, separated by ampersands (`&`).

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.printf("%d\n", maximum(3, 4, 5));
    System.out.printf("%.1f\n", maximum(6.6, 8.8, 7.7));
}

public static <T extends Number & Comparable<T>> T maximum(T x, T y, T z) {
    T max = x;      
    if(y.compareTo(max) > 0) {
        max = y;   
    }

    if(z.compareTo(max) > 0) {
        max = z;                    
    }
    return max;      
}
```

***Multiple Generic Parameters***

Also, generic methods can have more than one generic parameter.

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    display(1, "string");
}

public <T, U> void display(T first, U second) {
    System.out.println("First: " + first + ", Second: " + second);
}
```

***Wildcard Types***

Java 5.0 supports **wildcard types**.

<div class="alert-example">

`Collection<?>` is a wildcard type for collection classes. This type can be used for any collection type of any class components.

For example, consider the following generic method:

```java
void printCollection(Collection<?> c) {
    for (Object e: c) {
        System.out.println(e);
    }
}
```

This method prints the elements of any `Collection` class, regardless of the class of its components.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Some care must be taken with objects of the wildcard type.

For example, because the components of a particular object of this type have a type, other type objects cannot be added to the collection. For example, consider

```java
Collection<?> c = new ArrayList<String>();
```

It would be illegal to use the `add` method to put something into this collection
unless its type were `String`.

</div>

Wildcard types can be restricted, as is the case with nonwildcard types. Such types are called **bounded wildcard types**.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following method header:

```java
public void drawAll(ArrayList<? extends Shape> things)
```

The generic type here is a wildcard type that is a subclass of the `Shape` class. This method could be written to draw any object whose type is a subclass of `Shape`.

</div>

## Generic Methods in C# 2005

The generic methods of C# 2005 are similar in capability to those of Java 5.0, except there is no support for wildcard types.

One unique feature of C# 2005 generic methods is that the actual type parameters in a call can be omitted if the compiler can infer the unspecified type.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following skeletal class definition:

```csharp
class MyClass {
    public static T DoIt<T>(T p1) {
        ...
    }
}
```

The method `DoIt` can be called without specifying the generic parameter if the compiler can infer the generic type from the actual parameter in the call. For example, both of the following calls are legal:

```csharp
int myInt = MyClass.DoIt(17);           // Calls DoIt<int>
string myStr = MyClass.DoIt('apples');  // Calls DoIt<string>
```

</div>

## Generic Functions in F#

The type inferencing system of F# is not always able to determine the type of parameters or the return type of a function. When this is the case, for some functions F# infers a generic type for the parameters and the return value. This is called **automatic generalization**.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following function definition:

```fsharp
let getLast (a, b, c) = c;;
```

Because no type information was included, the types of the parameters and the return value are all inferred to be generic. Because this function does not include any computations, this is a simple generic function.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Functions can be defined to have generic parameters, as in the following example:

```fsharp
let printPair (x: 'a) (y: 'a) =
    printfn "%A %A" x y;;
```

- The `%A` format specification is for any type.
- The apostrophe (`'`) in front of the type named `a` specifies it to be a generic type.

This function definition works (with generic parameters) because no type-constrained operation is included.

</div>

Arithmetic operators are examples of type-constrained operations.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following function definition:

```fsharp
let adder x y = x + y;;
```

*Type inferencing* sets the type of `x` and `y` and the return value to `int`.

Because there is *no type coercion* in F#, the following call is illegal

```fsharp
adder 2.5 3.6;; // error
```

Even if the type of the parameters were set to be generic, the `+` operator would cause the types of `x` and `y` to be ``int``.

</div>

The generic type could also be specified explicitly in angle brackets.

<div class="alert-example">

```fsharp
let printPair2<'T> x y =
    printfn "%A %A" x y;;
```

This function must be called with a type, as in the following:

```fsharp
printPair2<float> 3.5 2.4;;
```

</div>

Because of type inferencing and the lack of type coercions, F# generic functions are far less useful, especially for numeric computations, than those of C+ +, Java 5.0+, and C# 2005+.
