# Closures

***Without Nested Subprograms***

If a static-scoped programming language does not allow nested subprograms, *closures are not useful*, so such languages do not support them.

- All of the variables in the referencing environment of a subprogram in such a language (its local variables and the global variables) are accessible, regardless of the place in the program where the subprogram is called.

***With Nested Subprograms***

Defining a closure is a simple matter;

?> a **closure** is a subprogram and the referencing environment where it was defined. The referencing environment is needed if the subprogram can be called from any arbitrary place in the program.

---

Explaining a closure is not so simple.

When subprograms can be nested, in addition to locals and globals, the referencing environment of a subprogram can include variables defined in all enclosing subprograms.

- However, this is not an issue if the subprogram can be called only in places where all of the enclosing scopes are active and visible.

- It becomes an issue if a subprogram can be called elsewhere.

    This can happen if the subprogram can be passed as a parameter or assigned to a variable, thereby allowing it to be called from virtually anywhere in the program.

There is an associated problem:

The subprogram could be called after one or more of its nesting subprograms has terminated, which normally means that the variables defined in such nesting subprograms have been deallocated—they no longer exist.

For the subprogram to be callable from anywhere in the program, its referencing environment must be available wherever it might be called. Therefore, the variables defined in nesting subprograms may need lifetimes that are of the entire program, rather than just the time during which the subprogram in which they were defined is active.

- A variable whose lifetime is that of the whole program is said to have **unlimited extent**.
- This usually means they must be heap dynamic, rather than stack dynamic.

Nearly all functional programming languages, most scripting languages, and at least one primarily imperative language, C#, support closures. These languages are static-scoped, allow nested subprograms, and allow subprograms to be passed as parameters.

<div class="alert-example">

Following is an example of a closure written in JavaScript:

```js
function makeAdder(x) {
    return function(y) {return x + y;} // return a closure
}
...
var add10 = makeAdder(10);
var add5 = makeAdder(5);
document.write("Add 10 to 20: " + add10(20) + "<br />");
document.write("Add 5 to 20: " + add5(20) + "<br />");
```

The output of this code, assuming it was embedded in an HTML document and displayed with a browser, is as follows:

```output
Add 10 to 20: 30
Add 5 to 20: 25
```

In this example,

- The closure is the anonymous function defined inside the `makeAdder` function, which `makeAdder` returns.
- The variable `x` referenced in the closure function is bound to the parameter that was sent to `makeAdder`.

The `makeAdder` function is called twice, once with a parameter of 10 and once with 5. Each of these calls returns a different version of the closure because they are bound to different values of `x`.

- The first call to `makeAdder` creates a function that adds 10 to its parameter;
- the second creates a function that adds 5 to its parameter.

The two versions of the function are bound to different activations of `makeAdder`. Obviously, the lifetime of the version of `x` created when `makeAdder` is called must extend over the lifetime of the program.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

This same closure function can be written in C# using a nested anonymous delegate.

- The type of the nesting method is specified to be a function that takes an `int` as a parameter and returns an anonymous delegate.

- The return type is specified with the special notation for such delegates, `Func<int, int>`.

    - The first type in the angle brackets is the parameter type. Such a delegate can encapsulate methods that have only one parameter.
    - The second type is the return type of the method encapsulated by the delegate.

```csharp
static Func<int, int> makeAdder(int x) {
    return delegate(int y) { return x + y;};
}
...
Func<int, int> Add10 = makeAdder(10);
Func<int, int> Add5 = makeAdder(5);
Console.WriteLine("Add 10 to 20: {0}", Add10(20));
Console.WriteLine("Add 5 to 20: {0}", Add5(20));
```

The output of this code is exactly the same as for the previous JavaScript closure
example.

The anonymous delegate could have been written as a lambda expression.
The following is a replacement for the body of the `makeAdder` method, using
a lambda expression instead of the delegate:

```csharp
return y => x + y
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Ruby’s blocks are implemented so that they can reference variables visible in the position in which they were defined, even if they are called at a place in which those variables would have disappeared. This makes such blocks closures.

</div>
