# Fundamentals of Subprograms

***General Subprogram Characteristics***

All subprograms discussed in this chapter, *except* the coroutines described in [Section 9-13][], have the following characteristics:

- Each subprogram has a single entry point.
- The calling program unit is suspended during the execution of the called subprogram, which implies that there is only one subprogram in execution at any given time.
- Control always returns to the caller when the subprogram execution terminates.

***Procedures and Functions***

The two fundamental kinds of subprograms:

- **Procedures**
- **Functions**

are defined and discussed in [§ Procedures and Functions][].

***Concurrency***

Alternatives to these result in coroutines and concurrent units ([Chapter 13][]).

***Anonymous Subprograms***

Most subprograms have names, although some are anonymous. [Section 9-12][] has examples of anonymous subprograms in C#.

[§ Procedures and Functions]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch09/9-2?id=procedures-and-functions
[Section 9-12]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch09/9-12
[Section 9-13]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch09/9-13
[Chapter 13]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch13/13-1

## Basic Definitions

A **subprogram definition** describes:

- The *interface* to the subprogram abstraction.
- The *actions* of the subprogram abstraction.

A **subprogram call** is the explicit request that a specific subprogram be executed. A subprogram is said to be **active** if, after having been called, it has begun execution but has not yet completed that execution.

***Subprogram Header***

A **subprogram header**, which is the first part of the definition, serves several purposes.

- First, it specifies that the following syntactic unit is a subprogram definition of some particular kind. In languages that have more than one kind of subprogram, the kind of the subprogram is usually specified with a special word.
- Second, if the subprogram is not anonymous, the header provides a name for the subprogram.
- Third, it may specify a list of parameters.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following header examples:

```python
def adder (parameters):
```

This is the header of a Python subprogram named `adder`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Ruby subprogram headers also begin with `def`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The header of a JavaScript subprogram begins with `function`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In C, the header of a function named `adder` might be as follows:

```c
void adder (parameters)
```

The reserved word `void` in this header indicates that the subprogram does not return a value.

</div>

***Subprogram Body***

The body of subprograms defines its actions.

<div class="alert-example">

In the C-based languages (and some others—for example, JavaScript) the body of a subprogram is delimited by braces (`{}`).

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Ruby, an `end` statement terminates the body of a subprogram.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

As with compound statements, the statements in the body of a Python function must be indented and the end of the body is indicated by the first statement that is not indented.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

One characteristic of Python functions that sets them apart from the functions of other common programming languages is that function `def` statements are *executable*.

When a `def` statement is executed, it assigns the given name to the given function body. Until a function’s `def` has been executed, the function cannot be called.

Consider the following skeletal example:

```python
# 根據程式的執行路徑定義不同的函式行為
if ...
    def fun( ... ):
        # 定義版本 A 的函式本體以供呼叫。版本 B 並不存在
        ...
else
    def fun( ... ):
        # 定義版本 B 的函式本體以供呼叫。版本 A 並不存在
        ...
```

- If the $\textbf{then}$ clause of this selection construct is executed, that version of the function `fun` can be called, but not the version in the $\textbf{else}$ clause.
- Likewise, if the $\textbf{else}$ clause is chosen, its version of the function can be called but the one in the $\textbf{then}$ clause cannot.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Ruby methods differ from the subprograms of other programming languages in several interesting ways.

Ruby methods

- are often defined in class definitions
- but can also be defined outside class definitions, in which case they are considered methods of the root object, `Object`.

Such methods can be called without an object receiver, as if they were functions in C or C++.

If a Ruby method is called without a receiver,

- `self` is assumed.
- If there is no method by that name in the class, enclosing classes are searched, up to `Object`, if necessary.

```ruby
def globalMethod
    puts "This is a method of the root object, Object."
end

class Example
    def instanceMethod
        puts "This is an instance method of Example."
    end

    def callGlobal
        # globalMethod 沒有 receiver
        # 預設為 self (It’s a Ruby keyword that gives you access to the current object.)
        # 但 Example 並沒有此 method，因此向上層類別搜尋
        globalMethod
    end
end

# call the method of the root object
globalMethod 

# call the instance methods of Example
example = Example.new
example.instanceMethod
example.callGlobal
```

</div>

***Protocol of a Subprogram***

The **parameter profile** of a subprogram contains the number, order, and types of its formal parameters.

The **protocol** of a subprogram is its parameter profile plus, if it is a function, its return type. In languages in which subprograms have types, those types are defined by the subprogram’s protocol.

***Function Declaration (Prototype)***

Subprograms can have *declarations* as well as definitions.

- This form parallels the variable declarations and definitions in C, in which declarations are used to provide type information but not to define variables.
- Subprogram declarations provide the subprogram’s protocol but do *not* include their bodies.

In languages that do not allow forward references to subprograms, function declarations are necessary.

- A *forward declaration* is the declaration of a method or variable before you implement and use it.
- A *forward reference* is the opposite. It refers to the use of an entity before its declaration.

<div class="alert-example">

Function declarations are common in C and C++ programs, where they are called **prototypes**. Such declarations are often placed in header files.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In most other languages (other than C and C++), subprograms do *not need* declarations, because there is no requirement that subprograms be defined before they are called.

</div>

***Static Type Checking***

In both the cases of variables and subprograms, declarations are needed for static type checking. In the case of subprograms, it is the *type of the parameters* that must be checked.

## Parameters

Subprograms typically describe computations.

***Parameter Passing vs. Nonlocal Variables***

<div class="alert-note">

- Subprograms—collections of statements that define parameterized computations.
- Method—a set of instructions that are associated with an object.

</div>

There are two ways that a nonmethod subprogram can gain access to the data that it is to process:

- Through direct access to nonlocal variables (declared elsewhere but visible in the subprogram).
- Through parameter passing. Data passed through parameters are accessed using names that are local to the subprogram.

Parameter passing is more flexible than direct access to nonlocal variables.

- In essence, <mark>a subprogram</mark> (with parameter access (to the data that it is to process)) <mark>is a parameterized computation.</mark> It can perform its computation on whatever data it receives through its parameters (presuming the types of the parameters are as expected by the subprogram).
- If data access is through nonlocal variables, the only way the computation can proceed on different data is to assign new values to those nonlocal variables between calls to the subprogram.

Extensive access to nonlocals can reduce reliability.

- Nonlocals might be visible in the subprogram where they are not needed.
- This problem was discussed in Chapter 5.

***Method (OOP)***

Methods also access external data through nonlocal references and parameters.

- The primary data to be processed by a method is the object through which the method is called.
- However, when a method does access nonlocal data, the reliability problems are the same as with nonmethod subprograms.

Also, in an object-oriented language, method access to class variables (those associated with the class, rather than an object) is related to the concept of nonlocal data and should be avoided whenever possible.

- In this case, as well as the case of a C function accessing nonlocal data, the method can have the side effect of changing something other than its parameters or local data.
- Such changes complicate the semantics of the method and make it less reliable.

***In Functional Programming Languages***

Pure functional programming languages, such as Haskell, do not have mutable data, so functions written in them are unable to change memory in any way—they simply perform calculations and return a resulting value (or function, since functions are values in a pure functional language).

***Parameters That Are Subprograms***

In some situations, it is convenient to be able to transmit computations, rather than data, as parameters to subprograms. In these cases, the name of the subprogram that implements that computation may be used as a parameter. This form of parameter is discussed in [Section 9-6][].

[Section 9-6]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch09/9-6

***Data Parameters***

Data parameters are discussed in Section 9-5.

### Formal and Actual Parameters

***Formal Parameters***

The parameters in the subprogram header are called **formal parameters**.

They are sometimes thought of as dummy variables because they are not variables in the usual sense: In most cases, they are bound to storage only when the subprogram is called, and that binding is often through some other program variables.

***Actual Parameters***

Subprogram call statements must include the name of the subprogram and a list of parameters to be bound to the formal parameters of the subprogram. These parameters are called **actual parameters**.

They must be distinguished from formal parameters, because the two usually have different restrictions on their forms, and of course, their uses are quite different.

<div class="alert-example">

```c
// `a` and `b` are formal parameters
int sum(int a, int b) {
    return a + b;
}

// 3 and 5 are actual parameters
int result = sum(3, 5);
```

</div>

***Correspondence Between Actual and Formal Parameters***

In most programming languages, the correspondence between actual and formal parameters—or the binding of actual parameters to formal parameters—is done by position:

- The first actual parameter is bound to the first formal parameter and so forth.
- Such parameters are called **positional parameters**.

This is an effective and safe method of relating actual parameters to their corresponding formal parameters, as long as the parameter lists are relatively *short*.

When parameter lists are *long*,

- it is easy for a programmer to make mistakes in the order of actual parameters in the list.
- One solution to this problem is to provide **keyword parameters**, in which the name of the formal parameter to which an actual parameter is to be bound is specified with the actual parameter in a call.

<div class="alert-example">

Python functions can be called using this technique, as in

```python
sumer(length = my_length, list = my_array, sum = my_sum)
```

where the definition of `sumer` has the formal parameters `length`, `list`, and `sum`.

</div>

- The advantage of keyword parameters is that they can appear in any order in the actual parameter list.
- The disadvantage to keyword parameters is that the user of the subprogram must know the names of formal parameters.

<div class="alert-example">

In addition to keyword parameters, some languages, for example Python, allow positional parameters. Keyword and positional parameters can be mixed in a call, as in

```python
sumer(my_length, sum = my_sum, list = my_array)
```

</div>

The only restriction with this approach is that after a keyword parameter appears in the list, all remaining parameters must be keyworded. This restriction is necessary because a position may no longer be well defined after a keyword parameter has appeared.

***Default Value of Formal Parameter***

In Python, Ruby, C++, and PHP, formal parameters can have default values. A default value is used if no actual parameter is passed to the formal parameter in the subprogram header.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following Python function header:

```python
# 在 python 中，沒有預設值的 formal parameter 要放前面
def compute_pay(income, exemptions = 1, tax_rate = 0.2)
```

The `exemptions` formal parameter can be absent in a call to `compute_pay`; when it is, the value 1 is used.

No comma (`,`) is included for an absent actual parameter in a Python call, because  all actual parameters after an absent actual parameter must be keyworded.

For example, consider the following call:

```python
pay = compute_pay(20000.0, tax_rate = 0.15)
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In C++, which does *not* support keyword parameters, the rules for default parameters are necessarily different. The default parameters must appear last, because parameters are positionally associated.

Once a default parameter is omitted in a call, all remaining formal parameters must have default values.

A C++ function header for the `compute_pay` function can be written as follows:

```cpp
float compute_pay(float income, float tax_rate, int exemptions = 1)
```

Notice that the parameters are rearranged so that the one with the default value is last. An example call to the C++ `compute_pay` function is

```cpp
pay = compute_pay(20000.0, 0.15);
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In most languages that do not have default values for formal parameters, the number of actual parameters in a call must match the number of formal parameters in the subprogram definition header.

However, in C, C++, Perl, and JavaScript, this is not required.

When there are fewer actual parameters in a call than formal parameters in a function definition, it is the programmer’s responsibility to ensure that the parameter correspondence, which is always positional, and the subprogram execution are sensible.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Although this design, which allows a variable number of parameters, is clearly prone to error, it is also sometimes convenient.

For example, the `printf` function of C can print any number of items (data values and/or literals).

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

C# allows methods to accept a variable number of parameters, as long as they are of the same type.

The method specifies its formal parameter with the `params` modifier. The call can send either an array or a list of expressions, whose values are placed in an array by the compiler and provided to the called method.

For example, consider the following method:

```csharp
public void DisplayList(params int[] list) {
    foreach (int next in list) {
        Console.WriteLine("Next value {0}", next);
    }
}
```

If `DisplayList` is defined for the class `MyClass` and we have the following declarations,

```csharp
MyClass myObject = new MyClass;
int[] myList = new int[6] {2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12};
```

`DisplayList` could be called with either of the following:

```csharp
myObject.DisplayList(myList);
myObject.DisplayList(2, 4, 3 * x - 1, 17);
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Ruby supports a complicated but highly flexible actual parameter configuration.

The initial parameters are expressions, whose value objects are passed to the corresponding formal parameters.

- The initial parameters can be followed by a list of key `=>` value pairs, which are placed in an anonymous hash and a reference to that hash is passed to the next formal parameter.
- These are used as a substitute for keyword parameters, which Ruby does not support.
- The hash item can be followed by a single parameter preceded by an asterisk (`*`). This parameter is called the **array formal parameter**.

When the method is called,

- the array formal parameter is set to reference a new `Array` object.
- All remaining actual parameters are assigned to the elements of the new `Array` object.
- If the actual parameter that corresponds to the array formal parameter is an array, it must also be preceded by an asterisk (`*`), and it must be the last actual parameter.

So, Ruby allows a variable number of parameters in a way similar to that of C#.

Because Ruby arrays can store different types, there is no requirement that the actual parameters passed to the array have the same type.

The following example skeletal function definition and call illustrate the parameter structure of Ruby:

```ruby
list = [2, 4, 6, 8]

def tester(p1, p2, p3, *p4)
    ...
end

tester('first', mon => 72, tue => 68, wed => 59, *list)
```

Inside `tester`, the values of its formal parameters are as follows:

```ruby
p1 is 'first'
p2 is {mon => 72, tue => 68, wed => 59}
p3 is 2
p4 is [4, 6, 8]
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Python supports parameters that are similar to those of Ruby.

</div>

## Procedures and Functions

Subprograms are collections of statements that define parameterized computations.

There are two distinct categories of subprograms

- **Functions** *return values* and
- **Procedures** do not.

<div class="alert-example">

In most languages that do not include procedures as a separate form of subprogram, functions can be defined not to  return values and they can be used as procedures.

</div>

***Procedures***

<div class="alert-example">

The computations of a procedure are enacted by single call statements. In effect, procedures define new statements.

For example, if a particular language does not have a sort statement, a user can build a procedure to sort arrays of data and use a call to that procedure in place of the unavailable sort statement.

Only some older languages, such as Fortran and Ada, support procedures.

</div>

Procedures can produce results in the calling program unit by two methods:

1. If there are variables that are not formal parameters but are still visible in both the procedure and the calling program unit, the procedure can change them;
2. if the procedure has formal parameters that allow the transfer of data to the caller, those parameters can be changed.

***Functions***

Functions structurally resemble procedures but are semantically modeled on mathematical functions.

- If a function is a faithful model, it produces *no side effects*;

    that is, it modifies neither its parameters nor any variables defined outside the function. Such a function returns a value—that is its *only* desired effect.

- The functions in most programming languages have side effects.

Functions are called by appearances of their names in expressions, along with the required actual parameters. The value produced by a function’s execution is returned to the calling code, effectively replacing the call itself.

<div class="alert-example">

- The value of the expression `f(x)` is whatever value `f` produces when called with the parameter `x`.
- For a function that does not produce side effects, the returned value is its only effect.

</div>

Functions define new user-defined operators.

<div class="alert-example">

If a language does not have an exponentiation operator, a function can be written that returns the value of one of its parameters raised to the power of another parameter.

Its header in C++ could be

```cpp
float power(float base, float exp)
```

which could be called with

```cpp
result = 3.4 * power(10.0, x)
```

The standard C++ library includes a similar function named `pow`.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Compare this with the same operation in Perl, in which exponentiation is a built-in operation (`**`):

```perl
result = 3.4 * 10.0 ** x
```

</div>

***Defining New Functions for Operator (Overload Operator)***

User-defined overloaded operators are discussed in [Section 9-11][].

[Section 9-11]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch09/9-11
