# Design Issues for Subprograms

Subprograms are complex structures, and it follows from this that a lengthy
list of issues is involved in their design. One obvious issue is the choice of
one or more parameter-passing methods that will be used. The wide variety
of approaches that have been used in various languages is a ref lection of the
diversity of opinion on the subject. A closely related issue is whether the types
of actual parameters will be type checked against the types of the corresponding
formal parameters.

The nature of the local environment of a subprogram dictates to some
degree the nature of the subprogram. The most important question here is
whether local variables are statically or dynamically allocated.

Next, there is the question of whether subprogram definitions can be
nested. Another issue is whether subprogram names can be passed as parameters.
If subprogram names can be passed as parameters and the language allows
subprograms to be nested, there is the question of the correct referencing
environment of a subprogram that has been passed as a parameter.

As seen in Chapter 5, side effects of functions can cause problems. So, restrictions
on side effects are a design issue for functions. The types and number of
values that can be returned from functions are other design issues.

Finally, there are the questions of whether subprograms can be overloaded
or generic. An **overloaded subprogram** is one that has the same name as
another subprogram in the same referencing environment. A **generic subprogram**
is one whose computation can be done on data of different types in different
calls. A **closure** is a nested subprogram and its referencing environment,
which together allow the subprogram to be called from anywhere in a program.

- Are local variables statically or dynamically allocated?
- Can subprogram definitions appear in other subprogram definitions?
- What parameter-passing method or methods are used?
- Are the types of the actual parameters checked against the types of the
formal parameters?
- If subprograms can be passed as parameters and subprograms can be nested,
what is the referencing environment of a passed subprogram?
- Are functional side effects allowed?
- What types of values can be returned from functions?
- How many values can be returned from functions?
- Can subprograms be overloaded?
- Can subprograms be generic?
- If the language allows nested subprograms, are closures supported?

These issues and example designs are discussed in the following sections.
