# Local Referencing Environments

## Local Variables

Subprograms can define their own variables, thereby defining local referencing environments. Variables that are defined inside subprograms are called **local variables**, because their scope is usually the body of the subprogram in which they are defined.

In the terminology of [Section 5-4][], local variables can be either *static* or *stack dynamic*.

[Section 5-4]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch05/5-4?id=storage-bindings-and-lifetime

### Stack-Dynamic Local Variables

If local variables are stack dynamic:

- They are bound to storage when the subprogram begins execution.
- They are unbound from storage when that execution terminates.

***Advantages***

There are several advantages of stack-dynamic local variables:

- The primary one being flexibility. It is essential that recursive subprograms have stack-dynamic local variables.
- The storage for local variables in an active subprogram can be shared with the local variables in all inactive subprograms. This is not as important an advantage as it was when computers had smaller memories.

***Disadvantages***

The main disadvantages of stack-dynamic local variables are the following:

- First, there is the cost of the time required to allocate, initialize (when necessary), and deallocate such variables for each call to the subprogram.

- Second, *accesses* to stack-dynamic local variables must be *indirect*, whereas accesses to static variables can be direct.

    This indirectness is required because the place in the stack where a particular local variable will reside can be determined only during execution (see [Chapter 10][]).

- Finally, when all local variables are stack dynamic, subprograms cannot be history sensitive; that is, they cannot retain data values of local variables between calls. It is sometimes convenient to be able to write history-sensitive subprograms.

  <div class="alert-example">

    A common example of a need for a history-sensitive subprogram is one whose task is to generate pseudorandom numbers.

    - Each call to such a subprogram computes one pseudorandom number, using the last one it computed.
    - It must, therefore, store the last one in a static local variable.

  </div>

[Chapter 10]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch10/10-1

### Static Local Variables

***Advantages***

- The primary advantage of static local variables over stack-dynamic local variables is that they are slightly more efficient—they require no run-time overhead for allocation and deallocation.
- Also, if accessed directly, these accesses are obviously more efficient.
- And, of course, they allow subprograms to be history sensitive.

***Disadvantages***

- The greatest disadvantage of static local variables is their inability to support recursion.
- Also, their storage cannot be shared with the local variables of other inactive subprograms.

### Examples

In most contemporary languages, local variables in a subprogram are by default stack dynamic.

<div class="alert-example">

In C and C++ functions, locals are stack dynamic unless specifically declared to be static.

In the following C (or C++) function, the variable `sum` is static and `count` is stack dynamic.

```c
int adder(int list[], int listLen) {
    static int sum = 0; // static local variable
    int count;          // stack dynamic local variable
    for (count = 0; count < listLen; count ++)
        sum += list [count];
    return sum;
}
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

The methods of C++, Java, and C# have only stack-dynamic local variables.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

In Python, the only declarations used in method definitions are for globals.

- Any variable declared to be global in a method must be a variable defined outside the method.

```python
x = 10  # 定義在方法外部

def example():
    global x  # 宣告 x 是全域變數
    x = 20

example()
print(x)
```

- A variable defined outside the method can be referenced in the method without declaring it to be global, but such a variable cannot be assigned in the method.

```python
y = 15  # 全域變數

def example():
    print(y)    # 可以直接引用全域變數 `y`，但不能對其賦值（除非像前例一樣宣告為 global）
    y = 25      # UnboundLocalError:
                #     cannot access local variable 'y'
                #     where it is not associated with a value

example()
```

- If the name of a global variable is assigned in a method, it is implicitly declared to be a local and the assignment does not disturb the global.

```python
z = 5  # 全域變數

def example():
    z = 50    # 隱式定義 z 為區域變數 (stack-dynamic local variable)
    print(z)  # output: 50

example()
print(z)  # output: 5
```

All local variables in Python methods are stack dynamic.

</div>

## Nested Subprograms

The motivation was to be able to create a hierarchy of both logic and scopes. If a subprogram is needed only within another subprogram, why not place it there and hide it from the rest of the program?

Because static scoping is usually used in languages that allow subprograms to be nested, this also provides a highly structured way to grant access to nonlocal variables in enclosing subprograms. Recall that in [Chapter 5][], the problems introduced by this were discussed.

[Chapter 5]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch05/5-5?id=static-scope

<div class="alert-example">

Many other languages, including all of the direct descendants of C, do *not* allow subprogram nesting.

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

For a long time, the only languages that allowed nested subprograms were those directly descending from ALGOL 60, which were ALGOL 68, Pascal, and Ada.

Recently, some new languages again allow it. Among these are JavaScript, Python, and Ruby. Also, most functional programming languages allow subprograms to be nested.

</div>
