# Parameters That Are Subprograms

In programming, a number of situations occur that are most conveniently handled if subprogram names can be sent as parameters to other subprograms

<div class="alert-example">

One common example of these occurs when a subprogram must sample some mathematical function.

For example, a subprogram that does numerical integration estimates the area under the graph of a function by sampling the function at a number of different points.

- When such a subprogram is written, it should be usable for any given function; it should not need to be rewritten for every function that must be integrated.
- It is therefore natural that the name of a program function that evaluates the mathematical function to be integrated be sent to the integrating subprogram as a parameter.

</div>

Although the idea is natural and seemingly simple, the details of how it works can be confusing. If only the transmission of the subprogram code was necessary, it could be done by passing a single pointer.

However, two complications arise.

***Type Checking the Parameters***

First, there is the matter of type checking the parameters of the activations of the subprogram that was passed as a parameter.

In C and C++,

- Functions cannot be passed as parameters, but pointers to functions can.
- The type of a pointer to a function includes the function’s protocol. Because the protocol includes all parameter types, such parameters can be completely type checked.

***Referencing Environment***

The second complication with parameters that are subprograms appears only with languages that allow *nested subprograms*.

The issue is what referencing environment for executing the passed subprogram should be used. There are three choices:

- The environment of the call statement that enacts the passed subprogram (**shallow binding**)

  ?> 副程式中若無定義變數，則會參考執行副程式的*敘述*當時的環境來取變數值。會在ㄧ些 dynamic-scoped languages 中使用。

    Shallow binding is not appropriate for static-scoped languages with nested subprograms.

    <div class="alert-example">

    Suppose the procedure `Sender` passes the procedure `Sent` as a parameter to the procedure `Receiver`. The problem is that `Receiver` may not be in the static environment of `Sent`, thereby making it highly unnatural for `Sent` to have access to `Receiver`’s variables.

    </div>

- The environment of the definition of the passed subprogram (**deep binding**)

  ?> 副程式中若無定義變數，則會參考副程式*定義*時結構的上層來取變數值。適合 static-scoped languages。

  It is perfectly normal in such a language for any subprogram, including one sent as a parameter, to have its referencing environment determined by the lexical position of its definition. It is therefore more logical for these languages to use deep binding.

- The environment of the call statement that passed the subprogram as an actual parameter (**ad hoc binding**)

  ?> 副程式中若無定義變數，則會參考*呼叫*副程式時的*環境*來取變數值。未被實際使用過。

  !> Ad hoc binding has *never* been used because, one might surmise, the environment in which the procedure appears as a parameter has no natural connection to the passed subprogram.

In some cases, the subprogram that declares a subprogram also passes that subprogram as a parameter. In those cases, deep binding and ad hoc binding are the same.

<div class="alert-example">

The following example program, written with the syntax of JavaScript, illustrates these choices:

```js
function sub1() {
    var x;
    function sub2() {
        alert(x); // Creates a dialog box with the value of `x`
    };
    function sub3() {
        var x;
        x = 3;
        sub4(sub2);
    };
    function sub4(subx) {
        var x;
        x = 4;
        subx();
    };
    x = 1;
    sub3();
};
```

Consider the execution of `sub2` when it is called in `sub4`.

- For shallow binding, the referencing environment of that execution is that of `sub4`, so the reference to `x` in `sub2` is bound to the local `x` in `sub4`, and the output of the program is 4.
- For deep binding, the referencing environment of `sub2`’s execution is that of `sub1`, so the reference to `x` in `sub2` is bound to the local `x` in `sub1`, and the output is 1.
- For ad hoc binding, the binding is to the local `x` in `sub3`, and the output is 3.

</div>
