# Calling Subprograms Indirectly

There are situations in which subprograms must be called indirectly.

- These most often occur when the specific subprogram to be called is not known until run time.
- The call to the subprogram is made through a pointer or reference to the subprogram, which has been set during execution before the call is made.

***Common Applications***

The two most common applications of indirect subprogram calls are

- for event handling in graphical user interfaces, which are now part of nearly all Web applications, as well as many non-Web applications.
- for callbacks, in which a subprogram is called and instructed to notify the caller when the called subprogram has completed its work.

As always, our interest is not in these specific kinds of programming, but rather in programming language support for them.

***In C and C++***

C and C++ allow a program to define a pointer to a function, through which the function can be called.

In C++, pointers to functions are typed according to the return type and parameter types of the function, so that such a pointer can point only at functions with one particular protocol.

<div class="alert-example">

The following declaration defines a pointer (`pfun`) that can point to any function that takes a `float` and an `int` as parameters and returns a `float`:

```cpp
float (*pfun)(float, int);
```

Any function with the same protocol as this pointer can be used as the initial value of this pointer or be assigned to the pointer in a program.

</div>

In C and C++, a function name without following parentheses, like an array name without following brackets, is the *address* of the function (or array).

<div class="alert-example">

Both of the following are legal ways of giving an initial value or assigning a value to a pointer to a function:

```cpp
int myfun2 (int, int);  // A function declaration

// Create a pointer and initialize it to point to myfun2
int (*pfun2)(int, int) = myfun2;

// Assigning a function's address to a pointer
pfun2 = myfun2;
```

The function `myfun2` can now be called with either of the following statements:

```cpp
(*pfun2)(first, second); // legal, but unnecessary
```

```cpp
pfun2(first, second);
```

The first of these explicitly dereferences the pointer `pfun2`, which is legal, but unnecessary.

</div>

The function pointers of C and C++ can be sent as parameters and returned
from functions, although functions cannot be used directly in either of those
roles.

***In C#***

In C#, the power and flexibility of method pointers is increased by making them objects. These are called **delegates**, because instead of calling a method, a program delegates that action to a delegate.

To use a delegate,

- first the delegate class must be defined with a specific method protocol. An instantiation of a delegate holds the name of a method with the delegate’s protocol that it is able to call.
- The syntax of a declaration of a delegate is the same as that of a method declaration, except that the reserved word `delegate` is inserted just before the return type.

<div class="alert-example">

We could have the following:

```csharp
public delegate int Change(int x);
```

This delegate can be instantiated with any method that takes an `int` as a parameter and returns an `int`.

For example, consider the following method declaration:

```csharp
static int fun1(int x);
```

The delegate `Change` can be instantiated by sending the name of this method to the delegate’s constructor, as in the following:

```csharp
Change chgfun1 = new Change(fun1); // Full syntax
Change chgfun1 = fun1;             // Simplified syntax
```

Following is an example call to `fun1` through the delegate `chgfun1`:

```csharp
chgfun1(12); // fun1(12)
```

</div>

<div class="alert-example">

Objects of a delegate class can store more than one method. A second method can be added using the operator `+=`, as in the following:

```csharp
Change chgfun1 += fun2;
```

This places `fun2` in the `chgfun1` delegate, even if `chgfun1` previously had the value `null`.

</div>

- In our example, a *static method* is placed in the delegate `Change`.
- *Instance methods* can also be called through a delegate, in which case the delegate must store a reference to the method.
- Delegates can also be *generic*.

All of the methods stored in a delegate instance are called in the order in which they were placed in the instance. This is called a **multicast delegate**.

- Regardless of what is returned by the methods, only the value or object returned by the *last* one called is returned.
- Of course, this means that in most cases, `void` is returned by the methods called through a multicast
delegate.

Delegates are used

- for event handling by .NET applications.
- to implement closures (see [Section 9-12][]).

[Section 9-12]: /notes/programming-language/程式語言概念/ch09/9-12

***In Other Languages***

- As is the case with C and C++, the name of a function in Python without the following parentheses is a pointer to that function.
- Ada 95 has pointers to subprograms, but Java does not.
- In Python and Ruby, as well as most functional languages, subprograms are treated like data, so they can be assigned to variables.

Therefore, in these languages, there is little need for pointers to subprograms.
