# Design Issues for Functions

## Functional Side Effects

Because of the problems of side effects of functions that are called in expressions, as described in Chapter 5, parameters to functions should always be in-mode (readonly).

In fact, some languages require this; for example,

- Ada functions can have only in-mode formal parameters. This requirement effectively prevents a function from causing side effects through its parameters or through aliasing of parameters and globals.
- In most other imperative languages, however, functions can have either pass-by-value or pass-by-reference parameters, thus allowing functions that cause side effects and aliasing.

Pure functional languages, such as Haskell and Ruby, do not have variables,
so their functions cannot have side effects.

## Types of Returned Values

***Functions***

Most imperative programming languages restrict the types that can be returned by their functions.

- C allows any type to be returned by its functions except arrays and functions. Both of these can be handled by pointer type return values.
- C++ is like C but also allows user-defined types, or classes, to be returned from its functions.
- Ada, Python, and Ruby are the only languages among current imperative languages whose functions (and/or methods) can return values of any type.
- In the case of Ada, however, because functions are not types in Ada, they cannot be returned from functions. Of course, pointers to functions can be returned by functions.

***Methods***

Neither Java nor C# can have functions, although their methods are similar to functions. In both, any type or class can be returned by methods. Because methods are not types, they cannot be returned.

***First-Class Objects***

- In some programming languages, subprograms are first-class objects, which means that they can be passed as parameters, returned from functions, and assigned to variables.
- Methods are first-class objects in some imperative languages, for example, Python and Ruby.
- The same is true for the functions in most functional languages.

## Number of Returned Values

In most languages, only a *single* value can be returned from a function.

However, that is not always the case. Ruby allows the return of *more* than one value from a method.

- If a `return` statement in a Ruby method is not followed by an expression, `nil` is returned.
- If followed by one expression, the value of the expression is returned.
- If followed by more than one expression, an array of the values of all of the expressions is returned.

In ML, F#, and Python, and some other languages that include tuples, multiple values can be returned by placing them in a tuple.
