# Overloaded Subprograms

***Overloaded Operator***

An overloaded operator is one that has multiple meanings. The meaning of a particular instance of an overloaded operator is determined by the types of its operands.

<div class="alert-example">

If the `*` operator has

- two floating-point operands in a Java program, it specifies floating-point multiplication.
- two integer operands, it specifies integer multiplication.

</div>

***Overloaded Subprograms***

An **overloaded subprogram** is a subprogram that has the same name as another subprogram in the same referencing environment.

- Every version of an overloaded subprogram must have a *unique protocol*; that is, it must be different from the others in the number, order, or types of its parameters, and possibly in its return type.
- The meaning of a call to an overloaded subprogram is determined by the actual parameter list and/or possibly the type of the returned value.

Although it is not necessary, overloaded subprograms usually implement the same process.

***Predefined Overloaded Subprograms***

C++, Java, and C# include predefined overloaded subprograms.

<div class="alert-example">

Many classes in C++, Java, and C# have overloaded constructors.

Because each version of an overloaded subprogram has a unique parameter profile, the compiler can disambiguate occurrences of calls to them by the different type parameters.

Unfortunately, it is not that simple. Parameter coercions, when allowed, complicate the disambiguation process enormously. Simply stated, the issue is that

- if no method’s parameter profile matches the number and types of the actual parameters in a method call,
- but two or more methods have parameter profiles that can be matched through coercions, which method should be called?

For a language designer to answer this question, he or she must decide how to rank all of the different coercions, so that the compiler can choose the method that “best” matches the call. This can be a complicated task. To understand the level of complexity of this process, we suggest the reader refer to the rules for disambiguation of method calls used in C++ (Stroustrup, 1997).

</div>

***Return Type Irrelevance in Overloading***

Because C++, Java, and C# allow mixed-mode expressions, the return type is irrelevant to disambiguation of overloaded functions (or methods). The context of the call does not allow the determination of the return type.

<div class="alert-example">

If a C++ program has two functions named `fun` and both take an `int` parameter but one returns an `int` and one returns a `float`, the program would not compile, because the compiler could not determine which version of `fun` should be used.

```cpp
int fun(int x);
float fun(int x);

int main() {
    fun(10); // 編譯器無法確定使用哪個 fun
}
```

</div>

Users are also allowed to write multiple versions of subprograms with the same name in Java, C++, C#, and F#. Once again, in C++, Java, and C# the most common user-defined overloaded methods are constructors.

***Default Parameters***

Overloaded subprograms that have default parameters can lead to ambiguous subprogram calls.

<div class="alert-example">

Consider the following C++ code:

```cpp
void fun(float b = 0.0) {}
void fun() {}

int main() {
    fun(); // error: call of overloaded ‘fun()’ is ambiguous
}
```

The call is ambiguous and will cause a compilation error.

</div>
